Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844
I have already announced in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher the critique of
jurisprudence and political science in the form of a critique of the Hegelian philosophy of law.
While preparing it for publication, the intermingling of criticism directed only against speculation
with criticism of the various subjects themselves proved utterly unsuitable, hampering the
development of the argument and rendering comprehension difficult. Moreover, the wealth and
diversity of the subjects to be treated could have been compressed into one work only in a purely
aphoristic style; whilst an aphoristic presentation of this kind, for its part, would have given the
impression of arbitrary systematism. I shall therefore publish the critique of law, ethics, politics,
etc., in a series of distinct, independent pamphlets, and afterwards try in a special work to present
them again as a connected whole showing the interrelationship of the separate parts, and lastly
attempt a critique of the speculative elaboration of that material. For this reason it will be found
that the interconnection between political economy and the state, law, ethics, civil life, etc., is
touched upon in the present work only to the extent to which political economy itself expressly
touches upon these subjects.
It is hardly necessary to assure the reader conversant with political economy that my results have
been attained by means of a wholly empirical analysis based on a conscientious critical study of
political economy.
(Whereas the uninformed reviewer who tries to hide his complete ignorance and intellectual
poverty by hurling the “utopian phrase” at the positive critic’s head, or again such phrases as
“quite pure, quite resolute, quite critical criticism,” the “not merely legal but social – utterly
social – society”, the “compact, massy mass”, the “outspoken spokesmen of the massy mass”2
this reviewer has yet to furnish the first proof that besides his theological family affairs he has
anything to contribute to a discussion of worldly matters.)
It goes without saying that besides the French and English socialists I have also used German
socialist works. The only original German works of substance in this science, however – other
than Weitling’s writings – are the essays by Hess published in Einundzwanzig Bogen3
 and
Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalökonomie by Engels in the Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher, where also the basic elements of this work [Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts
of 1844] have been indicated by me in a very general way.
(Besides being indebted to these authors who have given critical attention to political economy,
positive criticism as a whole – and therefore also German positive criticism of political economy
– owes its true foundation to the discoveries of Feuerbach, against whose Philosophie der Zukunft
2 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Preface
and Thesen zur Reform der Philosophie in the Anekdota, despite the tacit use that is made of
them, the petty envy of some and the veritable wrath of others seem to have instigated a regular
conspiracy of silence.
It is only with Feuerbach that positive, humanistic and naturalistic criticism begins. The less
noise they make, the more certain, profound, extensive, and enduring is the effect of Feuerbach’s
writings, the only writings since Hegel’s Phänomenologie and Logik to contain a real theoretical
revolution.
In contrast to the critical theologian of our day, I have deemed the concluding chapter of this
work – a critical discussion of Hegelian dialectic and philosophy as a whole to be absolutely
necessary, ||XL| a task not yet performed. This lack of thoroughness is not accidental, since even
the critical theologian remains a theologian. Hence, either he has to start from certain
presuppositions of philosophy accepted as authoritative; or, if in the process of criticism and as a
result of other people’s discoveries doubts about these philosophical presuppositions have arisen
in him, he abandons them in a cowardly and unwarrantable fashion, abstracts from them, thus
showing his servile dependence on these presuppositions and his resentment at this servility
merely in a negative, unconscious and sophistical manner.
(He does this either by constantly repeating assurances concerning the purity of his own criticism,
or by trying to make it seem as though all that was left for criticism to deal with now was some
other limited form of criticism outside itself – say eighteenth-century criticism – and also the
limitations of the masses, in order to divert the observer’s attention as well as his own from the
necessary task of settling accounts between criticism and its point of origin – Hegelian dialectic
and German philosophy as a whole – that is, from this necessary raising of modern criticism
above its own limitation and crudity. Eventually, however, whenever discoveries (such as
Feuerbach’s) are made regarding the nature of his own philosophic presuppositions, the critical
theologian partly makes it appear as if he were the one who had accomplished this, producing that
appearance by taking the results of these discoveries and, without being able to develop them,
hurling them in the form of catch-phrases at writers still caught in the confines of philosophy. He
partly even manages to acquire a sense of his own superiority to such discoveries by asserting in a
mysterious way and in a veiled, malicious and skeptical fashion elements of the Hegelian
dialectic which he still finds lacking in the criticism of that dialectic (which have not yet been
critically served up to him for his use) against such criticism – not having tried to bring such
elements into their proper relation or having been capable of doing so, asserting, say, the category
of mediating proof against the category of positive, self-originating truth, [...] in a way peculiar to
Hegelian dialectic. For to the theological critic it seems quite natural that everything has to be
done by philosophy, so that he can chatter away about purity, resoluteness, and quite critical
criticism; and he fancies himself the true conqueror of philosophy whenever he happens to feel
some element4
 in Hegel to be lacking in Feuerbach – for however much he practices the spiritual
idolatry of “self-consciousness” and “mind” the theological critic does not get beyond feeling to
consciousness.)
On close inspection theological criticism – genuinely progressive though it was at the inception
of the movement – is seen in the final analysis to be nothing but the culmination and consequence
of the old philosophical, and especially the Hegelian, transcendentalism, twisted into a
theological caricature. This interesting example of historical justice, which now assigns to
theology, ever philosophy’s spot of infection, the further role of portraying in itself the negative
dissolution of philosophy, i.e., the process of its decay – this historical nemesis I shall
demonstrate on another occasion.5
(How far, on the other hand, Feuerbach’s discoveries about the nature of philosophy still, for
their proof at least, called for a critical discussion of philosophical dialectic will be seen from my
exposition itself.) |XL||
First Manuscript
Wages of Labor
Wages are determined through the antagonistic struggle between capitalist and worker. Victory
goes necessarily to the capitalist. The capitalist can live longer without the worker than can the
worker without the capitalist. Combination among the capitalists is customary and effective;
workers’ combination is prohibited and painful in its consequences for them. Besides, the
landowner and the capitalist can make use of industrial advantages to augment their revenues; the
worker has neither rent nor interest on capital to supplement his industrial income. Hence the
intensity of the competition among the workers. Thus only for the workers is the separation of
capital, landed property, and labour an inevitable, essential and detrimental separation. Capital
and landed property need not remain fixed in this abstraction, as must the labor of the workers.
The separation of capital, rent, and labor is thus fatal for the worker.
The lowest and the only necessary wage rate is that providing for the subsistence of the worker
for the duration of his work and as much more as is necessary for him to support a family and for
the race of laborers not to die out. The ordinary wage, according to Smith, is the lowest
compatible with common humanity6
, that is, with cattle-like existence.
The demand for men necessarily governs the production of men, as of every other commodity.
Should supply greatly exceed demand, a section of the workers sinks into beggary or starvation.
The worker’s existence is thus brought under the same condition as the existence of every other
commodity. The worker has become a commodity, and it is a bit of luck for him if he can find a
buyer. And the demand on which the life of the worker depends, depends on the whim of the rich
and the capitalists. Should supply exceed demand, then one of the constituent parts of the price —
profit, rent or wages — is paid below its rate, [a part of these] factors is therefore withdrawn from
this application, and thus the market price gravitates [towards the] natural price as the centerpoint. But (1) where there is considerable division of labor it is most difficult for the worker to
direct his labor into other channels; (2) because of his subordinate relation to the capitalist, he is
the first to suffer.
Thus in the gravitation of market price to natural price it is the worker who loses most of all and
necessarily. And it is just the capacity of the capitalist to direct his capital into another channel
which either renders the worker, who is restricted to some particular branch of labor, destitute, or
forces him to submit to every demand of this capitalist.
The accidental and sudden fluctuations in market price hit rent less than they do that part of the
price which is resolved into profit and wages; but they hit profit less than they do wages. In most
cases, for every wage that rises, one remains stationary and one falls.
The worker need not necessarily gain when the capitalist does, but he necessarily loses when
the latter loses. Thus, the worker does not gain if the capitalist keeps the market price above the
natural price by virtue of some manufacturing or trading secret, or by virtue of monopoly or the
favorable situation of his land.
Furthermore, the prices of labor are much more constant than the prices of provisions. Often they
stand in inverse proportion. In a dear year wages fall on account of the decrease in demand, but
rise on account of the increase in the prices of provisions — and thus balance. In any case, a
number of workers are left without bread. In cheap years wages rise on account of the rise in
demand, but decrease on account of the fall in the prices of provisions — and thus balance.
Another respect in which the worker is at a disadvantage:

4 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
The labor prices of the various kinds of workers show much wider differences than the profits
in the various branches in which capital is applied. In labor all the natural, spiritual, and social
variety of individual activity is manifested and is variously rewarded, whilst dead capital always
keeps the same pace and is indifferent to real individual activity.
In general we should observe that in those cases where worker and capitalist equally suffer, the
worker suffers in his very existence, the capitalist in the profit on his dead mammon.
The worker has to struggle not only for his physical means of subsistence; he has to struggle to
get work, i.e., the possibility, the means, to perform his activity.
Let us take the three chief conditions in which society can find itself and consider the situation of
the worker in them:
(1) If the wealth of society declines the worker suffers most of all, and for the following reason:
although the working class cannot gain so much as can the class of property owners in a
prosperous state of society, no one suffers so cruelly from its decline as the working class.
(2) Let us now take a society in which wealth is increasing. This condition is the only one
favorable to the worker. Here competition between the capitalists sets in. The demand for workers
exceeds their supply. But:
In the first place, the raising of wages gives rise to overwork among the workers. The more they
wish to earn, the more must they sacrifice their time and carry out slave-labor, completely losing
all their freedom, in the service of greed. Thereby they shorten their lives. This shortening of their
life-span is a favorable circumstance for the working class as a whole, for as a result of it an everfresh supply of labor becomes necessary. This class has always to sacrifice a part of itself in order
not to be wholly destroyed.
Furthermore: When does a society find itself in a condition of advancing wealth? When the
capitals and the revenues of a country are growing. But this is only possible:
(a) As the result of the accumulation of much labor, capital being accumulated labor; as the result,
therefore, of the fact that more and more of his products are being taken away from the worker,
that to an increasing extent his own labor confronts him as another man’s property and that the
means of his existence and his activity are increasingly concentrated in the hands of the capitalist.
(b) The accumulation of capital increases the division of labor, and the division of labor increases
the number of workers. Conversely, the number of workers increases the division of labor, just as
the division of labor increases the accumulation of capital. With this division of labor on the one
hand and the accumulation of capital on the other, the worker becomes ever more exclusively
dependent on labor, and on a particular, very one-sided, machine-like labor at that. Just as he is
thus depressed spiritually and physically to the condition of a machine and from being a man
becomes an abstract activity and a belly, so he also becomes ever more dependent on every
fluctuation in market price, on the application of capital, and on the whim of the rich. Equally, the
increase in the class of people wholly dependent on work intensifies competition among the
workers, thus lowering their price. In the factory system this situation of the worker reaches its
climax.
(c) In an increasingly prosperous society only the richest of the rich can continue to live on
money interest. Everyone else has to carry on a business with his capital, or venture it in trade. As
a result, the competition between the capitalists becomes more intense. The concentration of
capital increases, the big capitalists ruin the small, and a section of the erstwhile capitalists sinks
into the working class, which as a result of this supply again suffers to some extent a depression
of wages and passes into a still greater dependence on the few big capitalists. The number of
capitalists having been diminished, their competition with respect to the workers scarcely exists
any longer; and the number of workers having been increased, their competition among
themselves has become all the more intense, unnatural, and violent. Consequently, a section of
5 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
the working class falls into beggary or starvation just as necessarily as a section of the middle
capitalists falls into the working class.
Hence even in the condition of society most favorable to the worker, the inevitable result for the
worker is overwork and premature death, decline to a mere machine, a bond servant of capital,
which piles up dangerously over and against him, more competition, and starvation or beggary for
a section of the workers.
The raising of wages excites in the worker the capitalist’s mania to get rich, which he, however,
can only satisfy by the sacrifice of his mind and body. The raising of wages presupposes and
entails the accumulation of capital, and thus sets the product of labor against the worker as
something ever more alien to him. Similarly, the division of labor renders him ever more onesided and dependent, bringing with it the competition not only of men but also of machines. Since
the worker has sunk to the level of a machine, he can be confronted by the machine as a
competitor. Finally, as the amassing of capital increases the amount of industry and therefore the
number of workers, it causes the same amount of industry to manufacture a larger amount of
products, which leads to over-production and thus either ends by throwing a large section of
workers out of work or by reducing their wages to the most miserable minimum.
Such are the consequences of a state of society most favorable to the worker — namely, of a state
of growing, advancing wealth.
Eventually, however, this state of growth must sooner or later reach its peak. What is the
worker’s position now?
3) “In a country which had acquired that full complement of riches both the wages
of labor and the profits of stock would probably be very low the competition for
employment would necessarily be so great as to reduce the wages of labor to what
was barely sufficient to keep up the number of laborers, and, the country being
already fully peopled, that number could never be augmented.” [Adam Smith,
Wealth of Nations, Vol. I, p. 84.]
The surplus would have to die.
Thus in a declining state of society — increasing misery of the worker; in an advancing state —
misery with complications; and in a fully developed state of society — static misery.
Since, however, according to Smith, a society is not happy, of which the greater part suffers —
yet even the wealthiest state of society leads to this suffering of the majority — and since the
economic system7
 (and in general a society based on private interest) leads to this wealthiest
condition, it follows that the goal of the economic system is the unhappiness of society.
Concerning the relationship between worker and capitalist we should add that the capitalist is
more than compensated for rising wages by the reduction in the amount of labor time, and that
rising wages and rising interest on capital operate on the price of commodities like simple and
compound interest respectively.
Let us put ourselves now wholly at the standpoint of the political economist, and follow him in
comparing the theoretical and practical claims of the workers.
He tells us that originally and in theory the whole product of labor belongs to the worker. But at
the same time he tells us that in actual fact what the worker gets is the smallest and utterly
indispensable part of the product — as much, only, as is necessary for his existence, not as a
human being, but as a worker, and for the propagation, not of humanity, but of the slave class of
workers.
The political economist tells us that everything is bought with labor and that capital is nothing but
accumulated labor; but at the same time he tells us that the worker, far from being able to buy
everything, must sell himself and his humanity.
6 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
Whilst the rent of the idle landowner usually amounts to a third of the product of the soil, and the
profit of the busy capitalist to as much as twice the interest on money, the “something more”
which the worker himself earns at the best of times amounts to so little that of four children of
his, two must starve and die.
Whilst according to the political economists it is solely through labor that man enhances the value
of the products of nature, whilst labor is man’s active possession, according to this same political
economy the landowner and the capitalist, who qua landowner and capitalist are merely
privileged and idle gods, are everywhere superior to the worker and lay down the law to him.
Whilst according to the political economists labor is the sole unchanging price of things, there is
nothing more fortuitous than the price of labor, nothing exposed to greater fluctuations.
Whilst the division of labor raises the productive power of labor and increases the wealth and
refinement of society, it impoverishes the worker and reduces him to a machine. Whilst labor
brings about the accumulation of capital and with this the increasing prosperity of society, it
renders the worker ever more dependent on the capitalist, leads him into competition of a new
intensity, and drives him into the headlong rush of overproduction, with its subsequent
corresponding slump.
Whilst the interest of the worker, according to the political economists, never stands opposed to
the interest of society, society always and necessarily stands opposed to the interest of the worker.
According to the political economists, the interest of the worker is never opposed to that of
society: (1) because the rising wages are more than compensated by the reduction in the amount
of labor time, together with the other consequences set forth above; and (2) because in relation to
society the whole gross product is the net product, and only in relation to the private individual
has the net product any significance.
But that labor itself, not merely in present conditions but insofar as its purpose in general is the
mere increase of wealth — that labor itself, I say, is harmful and pernicious — follows from the
political economist’s line of argument, without his being aware of it.
In theory, rent of land and profit on capital are deductions suffered by wages. In actual fact,
however, wages are a deduction which land and capital allow to go to the worker, a concession
from the product of labor to the workers, to labor.
When society is in a state of decline, the worker suffers most severely. The specific severity of
his burden he owes to his position as a worker, but the burden as such to the position of society.
But when society is in a state of progress, the ruin and impoverishment of the worker is the
product of his labor and of the wealth produced by him. The misery results, therefore, from the
essence of present-day labor itself.
Society in a state of maximum wealth — an ideal, but one which is approximately attained, and
which at least is the aim of political economy as of civil society — means for the workers static
misery.
It goes without saying that the proletarian, i.e., the man who, being without capital and rent, lives
purely by labor, and by a one-sided, abstract labor, is considered by political economy only as a
worker. Political economy can therefore advance the proposition that the proletarian, the same as
any horse, must get as much as will enable him to work. It does not consider him when he is not
working, as a human being; but leaves such consideration to criminal law, to doctors, to religion,
to the statistical tables, to politics and to the poor-house overseer.
Let us now rise above the level of political economy and try to answer two questions on the basis
of the above exposition, which has been presented almost in the words of the political
economists:
7 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
(1) What in the evolution of mankind is the meaning of this reduction of the greater part of
mankind to abstract labor?
(2) What are the mistakes committed by the piecemeal reformers, who either want to raise wages
and in this way to improve the situation of the working class, or regard equality of wages (as
Proudhon does) as the goal of social revolution?
In political economy labor occurs only in the form of activity as a source of livelihood.
“It can be asserted that those occupations which presuppose specific talents or
longer training have become on the whole more lucrative; whilst the proportionate
reward for mechanically monotonous activity in which one person can be trained
as easily and quickly as another has fallen with growing competition, and was
inevitably bound to fall. And it is just this sort of work which in the present state
of the organization of labor is still by far the commonest. If therefore a worker in
the first category now earns seven times as much as he did, say, fifty years ago,
whilst the earnings of another in the second category have remained unchanged,
then of course both are earning on the average four times as much. But if the first
category comprises only a thousand workers in a particular country, and the
second a million, then 999,000 are no better off than fifty years ago — and they
are worse off if at the same time the prices of the necessaries of life have risen.
With such superficial calculations of averages people try to deceive themselves
about the most numerous class of the population. Moreover, the size of the wage
is only one factor in the estimation of the worker’s income, because it is essential
for the measurement of the latter to take into account the certainty of its duration
— which is obviously out of the question in the anarchy of so-called free
competition, with its ever-recurring fluctuations and periods of stagnation. Finally,
the hours of work customary formerly and now have to be considered. And for the
English cotton-workers these have been increased, as a result of the entrepreneurs’
mania for profit. to between twelve and sixteen hours a day during the past
twenty-five years or so — that is to say, precisely during the period of the
introduction of labor-saving machines; and this increase in one country and in one
branch of industry inevitably asserted itself elsewhere to a greater or lesser degree,
for the right of the unlimited exploitation of the poor by the rich is still universally
recognised.” (Wilhelm Schulz, Die Bewegung der Production, p. 65)
“But even if it were as true as it is false that the average income of every class of
society has increased, the income-differences and relative income-distances may
nevertheless have become greater and the contrasts between wealth and poverty
accordingly stand out more sharply. For just because total production rises — and
in the same measure as it rises — needs, desires and claims also multiply and thus
relative poverty can increase whilst absolute poverty diminishes. The Samoyed
living on fish oil and rancid fish is not poor because in his secluded society all
have the same needs. But in a state that is forging ahead, which in the course of a
decade, say, increased by a third its total production in proportion to the
population, the worker who is getting as much at the end of ten years as at the
beginning has not remained as well off, but has become poorer by a third.” (Ibid.
pp. 65-66)
But political economy knows the worker only as a working animal — as a beast reduced to the
strictest bodily needs.
“To develop in greater spiritual freedom, a people must break their bondage to
their bodily needs — they must cease to be the slaves of the body. They must,
above all, have time at their disposal for spiritual creative activity and spiritual
enjoyment. The developments in the labor organism gain this time. Indeed, with
8 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
new motive forces and improved machinery, a single worker in the cotton mills
now often performs the work formerly requiring a hundred, or even 250 to 350
workers. Similar results can be observed in all branches of production, because
external natural forces are being compelled to participate to an ever-greater degree
in human labor. If the satisfaction of a given amount of material needs formerly
required a certain expenditure of time and human effort which has later been
reduced by half, then without any loss of material comfort the scope for spiritual
activity and enjoyment has been simultaneously extended by as much.... But again
the way in which the booty, that we win from old Kronos himself in his most
private domain, is shared out is still decided by the dice-throw of blind, unjust
Chance. In France it has been calculated that at the present stage in the
development of production an average working period of five hours a day by
every person capable of work could suffice for the satisfaction of all the material
interests of society.... Notwithstanding the time saved by the perfecting of
machinery. the duration of the slave-labor performed by a large population in the
factories has only increased.” (Schulz, op. cit., pp. 67, 68.)
“The transition from compound manual labor rests on a break-down of the latter
into its simple operations. At first, however, only some of the uniformly-recurring
operations will devolve on machines, while some will devolve on men. From the
nature of things, and from confirmatory experience, it is clear that unendingly
monotonous activity of this kind is as harmful to the mind as to the body; thus this
combination of machinery with mere division of labor among a greater number of
hands must inevitably show all the disadvantages of the latter. These
disadvantages appear, among other things, in the greater mortality of factory
workers.... Consideration has not been given ... to this big distinction as to how far
men work through machines or how far as machines.” (Ibid. p. 69)
“In the future life of the peoples, however, the inanimate forces of nature working
in machines will be our slaves and serfs.” (Ibid. p. 74)
“The English spinning mills employ 196,818 women and only 158,818 men. For
every 100 male workers in the cotton mills of Lancashire there are 103 female
workers, and in Scotland as many as 209. In the English flax mills of Leeds, for
every 100 male workers there were found to be 147 female workers. In Dundee
and on the east coast of Scotland as many as 280. In the English silk mills ... many
female workers; male workers predominate in the wool-mills where the work
requires greater physical strength. In 1833, no fewer than 38,927 women were
employed alongside 18,593 men in the North American cotton mills. As a result
of the changes in the labor organism, a wider sphere of gainful employment has
thus fallen to the share of the female sex.... Women now occupying an
economically more independent position ... the two sexes are drawn closer
together in their social conditions.” (Ibid. pp. 71, 72)
“Working in the English steam- and water-driven spinning mills in 1835 were:
20,558 children between the ages of eight and twelve; 35,867 between the ages of
twelve and thirteen; and, lastly, 108,208 children between the ages of thirteen and
eighteen.... Admittedly, further advances in mechanization, by more and more
removing all monotonous work from human hands, are operating in the direction
of a gradual elimination of this evil. But standing in the way of these more rapid
advances is the very circumstance that the capitalists can, in the easiest and
cheapest fashion, appropriate the energies of the lower classes down to the
children, to be used instead of mechanical devices.” (Ibid. pp. 70-71)
“Lord Brougham’s call to the workers — ‘Become capitalists’. ... This is the evil
that millions are able to earn a bare subsistence for themselves only by strenuous
9 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
labor which shatters the body and cripples them morally and intellectually; that
they are even obliged to consider the misfortune of finding such work a piece of
good fortune.” (Ibid. p. 60)
“In order to live, then, the non-owners are obliged to place themselves, directly or
indirectly, at the service of the owners — to put themselves, that is to say, into a
position of dependence upon them.” (Pecqueur, Théorie nouvelle d’économie soc.,
etc., p. 409)
“Servants — pay: workers — wages; employees — salary or emoluments.” (Ibid.
pp. 409-410)
“To hire out one’s labor”, “to lend one’s labor at interest”, “to work in another’s
place.”
“To hire out the materials of labor”, “to lend the materials of labor at interest”, “to
make others work in one’s place.” (Ibid. p. 411)
“Such an economic order condemns men to occupations so mean, to a degradation
so devastating and bitter, that by comparison savagery seems like a kingly
condition.... (Ibid. pp. 417, 418) “Prostitution of the non-owning class in all its
forms.” (Ibid. p. 421f) “Ragmen.”
Charles Loudon in the book Solution du problème de la population, etc., Paris, 18428
, declares
the number of prostitutes in England to be between sixty and seventy thousand. The number of
women of doubtful virtue is said to be equally large (p. 228).
“The average life of these unfortunate creatures on the streets, after they have
embarked on their career of vice, is about six or seven years. To maintain the
number of sixty to seventy thousand prostitutes, there must be in the three
kingdoms at least eight to nine thousand women who commit themselves to this
abject profession each year, or about twenty-four new victims each day — an
average of one per hour; and it follows that if the same proportion holds good over
the whole surface of the globe, there must constantly be in existence one and a
half million unfortunate women of this kind”. (Ibid. p. 229)
“The numbers of the poverty-stricken grow with their poverty, and at the extreme
limit of destitution human beings are crowded together in the greatest numbers
contending with each other for the right to suffer.... In 1821 the population of
Ireland was 6,801,827. In 1831 it had risen to 7,764,010 — an increase of 14 per
cent in ten years. In Leinster, the wealthiest province, the population increased by
only 8 per cent; whilst in Connaught, the most poverty-stricken province, the
increase reached 21 per cent. (Extract from the Enquiries Published in England on
Ireland, Vienna, 1840.)” (Buret, De la misère, etc., t. 1, pp. 36, 37)
Political economy considers labor in the abstract as a thing; “labor is a
commodity.” If the price is high, then the commodity is in great demand; if the
price is low, then the commodity is in great supply: “the price of labor as a
commodity must fall lower and lower.” (Buret, op. cit.) This is made inevitable
partly by the competition between capitalist and worker, partly by the competition
amongst the workers. “The working population, the seller of labor, is necessarily
reduced to accepting the most meager part of the product.... Is the theory of labor
as a commodity anything other than a theory of disguised bondage?” (Ibid. p. 43)
“Why then has nothing but an exchange-value been seen in labor?” (Ibid. p. 44)
The large workshops prefer to buy the labor of women and children, because this
costs less than that of men. (Op. cit.) “The worker is not at all in the position of a
free seller vis-à-vis the one who employs him.... The capitalist is always free to
employ labor, and the worker is always forced to sell it. The value of labor is
10 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
completely destroyed if it is not sold every instant. Labor can neither be
accumulated nor even be saved, unlike true [commodities].
“Labor is life, and if life is not each day exchanged for food, it suffers and soon
perishes. To claim that human life is a commodity, one must, therefore, admit
slavery.” (Ibid. pp. 49, 50) If then labor is a commodity, it is a commodity with
the most unfortunate attributes. But even by the principles of political economy it
is no commodity, for it is not the “free result of a free transaction.” The present
economic regime “simultaneously lowers the price and the remuneration of labor;
it perfects the worker and degrades the man.” (Ibid. pp. 52, 53) “Industry has
become a war, and commerce a gamble.” (Ibid. p. 62)
The cotton-working machines (in England) alone represent 84,000,000 manual
workers. (Ibid. p. 193)
Up to the present, industry has been in a state of war, a war of conquest: “It has
squandered the lives of the men who made up its army with the same indifference
as the great conquerors. Its aim was the possession of wealth, not the happiness of
men.” (Buret, op. cit., p. 20) “These interests” (that is, economic interests), “freely
left to themselves ... must necessarily come into conflict; they have no other
arbiter but war, and the decisions of war assign defeat and death to some, in order
to give victory to the others.... It is in the conflict of opposed forces that science
seeks order and equilibrium: perpetual war, according to it, is the sole means of
obtaining peace; that war is called competition.” (Ibid. p. 23)
“The industrial war, to be conducted with success, demands large armies which it
can amass on one spot and profusely decimate. And it is neither from devotion nor
from duty that the soldiers of this army bear the exertions imposed on them, but
only to escape the hard necessity of hunger. They feel neither attachment nor
gratitude towards their bosses, nor are these bound to their subordinates by any
feeling of benevolence. They do not know them as men, but only as instruments of
production which have to yield as much as possible with as little cost as possible.
These populations of workers, ever more crowded together, have not even the
assurance of always being employed. Industry, which has called them together,
only lets them live while it needs them, and as soon as it can get rid of them it
abandons them without the slightest scruple; and the workers are compelled to
offer their persons and their powers for whatever price they can get. The longer,
more painful and more disgusting the work they are given, the less they are paid.
There are those who, with sixteen hours’ work a day and unremitting exertion,
scarcely buy the right not to die.” (Ibid. pp. 68-69)
“We are convinced ... as are the commissioners charged with the inquiry into the
condition of the hand-loom weavers, that the large industrial towns would in a
short time lose their population of workers if they were not all the time receiving
from the neighboring rural areas constant recruitments of healthy men, a constant
flow of fresh blood.” (Ibid. p. 362)
Profit of Capital
1. Capital
What is the basis of capital, that is, of private property in the products of other men’s labor?
“Even if capital itself does not merely amount to theft or fraud, it still requires the
cooperation of legislation to sanctify inheritance.” (Say, Traité d’economie
politique, t. I. P. 136, footnote)9
11 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
How does one become a proprietor of productive stock? How does one become owner of the
products created by means of this stock?
By virtue of positive law. (Say, t. II, p. 4 )
What does one acquire with capital, with the inheritance of a large fortune, for instance?
“The person who [either acquires, or] succeeds to a great fortune, does not
necessarily [acquire or] succeed to any political power [.... ] The power which that
possession immediately and directly conveys to him, is the power of purchasing; a
certain command over all the labor, or over all the produce of labor, which is then
in the market.” (Wealth of Nations, by Adam Smith, Vol. I, pp. 26-27.)10
Capital is thus the governing power over labor and its products. The capitalist possesses this
power, not on account of his personal or human qualities, but inasmuch as he is an owner of
capital. His power is the purchasing power of his capital, which nothing can withstand.
Later we shall see first how the capitalist, by means of capital, exercises his governing power
over labor, then, however, we shall see the governing power of capital over the capitalist himself.
What is capital?
“A certain quantity of labor stocked and stored up to be employed.” (Adam Smith,
op. cit., Vol. I, p. 295.)
Capital is stored-up labor.
(2) Funds, or stock, is any accumulation of products of the soil or of manufacture. Stock is called
capital only when it yields to its owner a revenue or profit. (Adam Smith, op. cit., p. 243)
2. The Profit of Capital
The profit or gain of capital is altogether different from the wages of labor. This
difference is manifested in two ways: in the first place, the profits of capital are
regulated altogether by the value of the capital employed, although the labor of
inspection and direction associated with different capitals may be the same.
Moreover in large works the whole of this labor is committed to some principal
clerk, whose salary bears no regular proportion to the capital of which he oversees
the management. And although the labor of the proprietor is here reduced almost
to nothing, he still demands profits in proportion to his capital. (Adam Smith, op.
cit., Vol. I, p. 43)11
Why does the capitalist demand this proportion between profit and capital?
He would have no interest in employing the workers, unless he expected from the
sale of their work something more than is necessary to replace the stock advanced
by him as wages and he would have no interest to employ a great stock rather than
a small one, unless his profits were to bear some proportion to the extent of his
stock. (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 42)
The capitalist thus makes a profit, first, on the wages, and secondly on the raw materials
advanced by him.
What proportion, then, does profit bear to capital?
If it is already difficult to determine the usual average level of wages at a
particular place and at a particular time, it is even more difficult to determine the
profit on capitals. A change in the price of the commodities in which the capitalist
deals, the good or bad fortune of his rivals and customers, a thousand other
accidents to which commodities are exposed both in transit and in the warehouses
— all produce a daily, almost hourly variation in profit. (Adam Smith, op. cit.,
Vol. I, pp. 78-79) But though it is impossible to determine with precision what are
the profits on capitals, some notion may be formed of them from the interest of
12 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
money. Wherever a great deal can be made by the use of money, a great deal will
be given for the use of it; wherever little can be made by it, little will be given.
(Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 79) The proportion which the usual market rate of
interest ought to bear to the rate of clear profit, necessarily varies as profit rises or
falls. Double interest is in Great Britain reckoned what the merchants call a good,
moderate, reasonable profit, terms which mean no more than a common and usual
profit. (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 87)
What is the lowest rate of profit? And what the highest?
The lowest rate of ordinary profit on capital must always be something more than
what is sufficient to compensate the occasional losses to which every employment
of stock is exposed. It is this surplus only which is neat or clear profit. The same
holds for the lowest rate of interest. (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 86)
The highest rate to which ordinary profits can rise is that which in the price of the
greater part of commodities eats up the whole of the rent of the land, and reduces
the wages of labor contained in the commodity supplied to the lowest rate, the
bare subsistence of the laborer during his work. The worker must always be fed in
some way or other while he is required to work; rent can disappear entirely. For
example: the servants of the East India Company in Bengal. (Adam Smith, op.
cit., Vol. I, pp. 86-87)
Besides all the advantages of limited competition which the capitalist may exploit in this case, he
can keep the market price above the natural price by quite decorous means.
For one thing, by keeping secrets in trade if the market is at a great distance from
those who supply it, that is, by concealing a price change, its rise above the natural
level. This concealment has the effect that other capitalists do not follow him in
investing their capital in this branch of industry or trade.
Then again by keeping secrets in manufacture, which enable the capitalist to
reduce the costs of production and supply his commodity at the same or even at
lower prices than his competitors while obtaining a higher profit. (Deceiving by
keeping secrets is not immoral? Dealings on the Stock Exchange.) Furthermore,
where production is restricted to a particular locality (as in the case of a rare
wine), and where the effective demand can never he satisfied. Finally, through
monopolies exercised by individuals or companies. Monopoly price is the highest
possible. (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 53-54)
Other fortuitous causes which can raise the profit on capital: the acquisition of
new territories, or of new branches of trade, often increases the profit on capital
even in a wealthy country, because they withdraw some capital from the old
branches of trade, reduce competition, and cause the market to be supplied with
fewer commodities, the prices of which then rise: those who deal in these
commodities can then afford to borrow at a higher rate of interest. (Adam Smith,
op. cit., Vol. I, p. 83)
The more a commodity comes to be manufactured — the more it becomes an
object of manufacture — the greater becomes that part of the price which resolves
itself into wages and profit in proportion to that which resolves itself into rent. In
the progress of the manufacture of a commodity, not only the number of profits
increases, but every subsequent profit is greater than the foregoing; because the
capital from which it is derived must always be greater. The capital which
employs the weavers, for example, must always be greater than that which
employs the spinners; because it not only replaces that capital with its profits, but
pays, besides, the wages of weavers; and the profits must always bear some
proportion to the capital. (Op. cit., Vol. I, p. 45)
13 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
Thus the advance made by human labor in converting the product of nature into the manufactured
product of nature increases, not the wages of labor, but in part the number of profitable capital
investments, and in part the size of every subsequent capital in comparison with the foregoing.
More about the advantages which the capitalist derives from the division of labor, later.
He profits doubly — first, by the division of labor; and secondly, in general, by the advance
which human labor makes on the natural product. The greater the human share in a commodity,
the greater the profit of dead capital.
In one and the same society the average rates of profit on capital are much more
nearly on the same level than the wages of the different sorts of labor. (Op. cit.,
Vol. I, p. 100.) In the different employments of capital, the ordinary rate of profit
varies with the certainty or uncertainty of the returns.
The ordinary profit of stock, though it rises with the risk, does not always seem to
rise in proportion to it. (Op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 99-100.)
It goes without saying that profits also rise if the means of circulation become less expensive or
easier available (e.g., paper money).
3. The Rule of Capital over Labor and the Motives of the Capitalist
The consideration of his own private profit is the sole motive which determines
the owner of any capital to employ it either in agriculture, in manufactures, or in
some particular branch of the wholesale or retail trade. The different quantities of
productive Labor which it may put into motion, and the different values which it
may add to the annual produce of the land and labor of his country, according as it
is employed in one or other of those different ways, never enter into his thoughts.
(Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 335)
The most useful employment of capital for the capitalist is that which, risks being
equal, yields him the greatest profit. This employment is not always the most
useful for society; the most useful employment is that which utilizes the
productive powers of nature. (Say, t. II, pp. 130-31.)
The plans and speculations of the employers of capitals regulate and direct all the
most important operations of labor, and profit is the end proposed by all those
plans and projects. But the rate of profit does not, like rent and wages, rise with
the prosperity and fall with the decline of the society. On the contrary, it is
naturally low in rich and high in poor countries, and it is always highest in the
countries which are going fastest to ruin. The interest of this class, therefore, has
not the same connection with the general interest of the society as that of the other
two.... The particular interest of the dealers in any particular branch of trade or
manufactures is always in some respects different from, and frequently even in
sharp opposition to, that of the public. To widen the market and to narrow the
sellers’ competition is always the interest of the dealer.... This is a class of people
whose interest is never exactly the same as that of society, a class of people who
have generally an interest to deceive and to oppress the public. (Adam Smith, op.
cit., Vol. I, pp. 231-32)
4. The Accumulation of Capitals and the Competition among the Capitalists
The increase of stock, which raises wages, tends to lower the capitalists’ profit,
because of the competition amongst the capitalists. (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I,
p. 78)
If, for example, the capital which is necessary for the grocery trade of a particular
town “is divided between two different grocers, their competition will tend to
make both of them sell cheaper than if it were in the hands of one only; and if it
were divided among twenty, their competition would be just so much the greater,
14 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
and the chance of their combining together, in order to raise the price, just so
much the less.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 322)
Since we already know that monopoly prices are as high as possible, since the interest of the
capitalists, even from the point of view commonly held by political economists, stands in hostile
opposition to society, and since a rise of profit operates like compound interest on the price of the
commodity (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 87-88), it follows that the sole defense against the
capitalists is competition, which according to the evidence of political economy acts beneficently
by both raising wages and lowering the prices of commodities to the advantage of the consuming
public.
But competition is only possible if capital multiplies, and is held in many hands. The formation of
many capital investments is only possible as a result of multilateral accumulation, since capital
comes into being only by accumulation; and multilateral accumulation necessarily turns into
unilateral accumulation. Competition among capitalists increases the accumulation of capital.
Accumulation, where private property prevails, is the concentration of capital in the hands of a
few, it is in general an inevitable consequence if capital is left to follow its natural course, and it
is precisely through competition that the way is cleared for this natural disposition of capital.
We have been told that the profit on capital is in proportion to the size of the capital. A large
capital therefore accumulates more quickly than a small capital in proportion to its size, even if
we disregard for the time being deliberate competition.
12Accordingly, the accumulation of large capital proceeds much more rapidly than that of smaller
capital, quite irrespective of competition. But let us follow this process further.
With the increase of capital the profit on capital diminishes, because of competition. The first to
suffer, therefore, is the small capitalist.
The increase of capitals and a large number of capital investments presuppose, further, a
condition of advancing wealth in the country.
“In a country which had acquired its full complement of riches [ ... ] the ordinary
rate of clear profit would be very small, so the usual [market] rate of interest
which could be afforded out of it would be so low as to render it impossible for
any but the very wealthiest people to live upon the interest of their money. All
people of [...] middling fortunes would be obliged to superintend themselves the
employment of their own stocks. It would be necessary that almost every man
should be a man of business, or engage in some sort of trade.” (Adam Smith, op.
cit., Vol. I, p. 86)
This is the situation most dear to the heart of political economy.
“The proportion between capital and revenue, therefore, seems everywhere to
regulate the proportion between industry and idleness; wherever capital
predominates, industry prevails; wherever revenue, idleness.” (Adam Smith, op.
cit., Vol. I, p. 301.)
What about the employment of capital, then, in this condition of increased competition?
“As stock increases, the quantity of stock to be lent at interest grows gradually
greater and greater. As the quantity of stock to be lent at interest increases, the
interest ... diminishes (i) because the market price of things commonly diminishes
as their quantity increases. ... and (ii) because with the increase of capitals in any
country, “it becomes gradually more and more difficult to find within the country
a profitable method of employing any new capital. There arises in consequence a
competition between different capitals, the owner of one endeavoring to get
possession of that employment which is occupied by another. But upon most
occasions he can hope to jostle that other out of this employment by no other
15 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
means but by dealing upon more reasonable terms. He must not only sell what he
deals in somewhat cheaper, but in order to get it to sell, he must sometimes, too,
buy it dearer. The demand for productive labor, by the increase of the funds which
are destined for maintaining it, grows every day greater and greater. Laborers
easily find employment, but the owners of capitals find it difficult to get laborers
to employ. Their competition raises the wages of labor and sinks the profits of
stock.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 316)
Thus the small capitalist has the choice: (1) either to consume his capital, since he can no longer
live on the interest — and thus cease to be a capitalist; or (2) to set up a business himself, sell his
commodity cheaper, buy dearer than the wealthier capitalist, and pay higher wages — thus
ruining himself, the market price being already very low as a result of the intense competition
presupposed. If, however, the big capitalist wants to squeeze out the smaller capitalist, he has all
the advantages over him which the capitalist has as a capitalist over the worker. The larger size of
his capital compensates him for the smaller profits, and he can even bear temporary losses until
the smaller capitalist is ruined and he finds himself freed from this competition. In this way, he
accumulates the small capitalist’s profits.
Furthermore: the big capitalist always buys cheaper than the small one, because he buys bigger
quantities. He can therefore well afford to sell cheaper.
But if a fall in the rate of interest turns the middle capitalists from rentiers into businessmen, the
increase in business capital and the resulting smaller profit produce conversely a fall in the rate of
interest.
“When the profits which can be made by the use of a capital are diminished the
price which can be paid for the use of it [...] must necessarily be diminished with
them.” (Adam Smith, loc. cit., Vol. I, p. 316)
“As riches, improvement, and population have increased, interest has declined,”
and consequently the profits of capitalists, “after these [profits] are diminished,
stock may not only continue to increase, but to increase much faster than before.
[...] A great stock though with small profits, generally increases faster than a small
stock with great profits. Money, says the proverb, makes money.” (op. cit., Vol. I,
p. 83)
When, therefore, this large capital is opposed by small capitals with small profits, as it is under
the presupposed condition of intense competition, it crushes them completely.
The necessary result of this competition is a general deterioration of commodities, adulteration,
fake production and universal poisoning, evident in large towns.
An important circumstance in the competition of large and small capital is, furthermore, the
relation between fixed capital and circulating capital.
Circulating capital is a capital which is “employed in raising” provisions,
“manufacturing, or purchasing goods, and selling them again. [... ] The capital
employed in this manner yields no revenue or profit to its employer, while it either
remains in his possession, or continues in the same shape. [...] His capital is
continually going from him in one shape, and returning to him in another, and it is
only by means of such circulation, or successive exchanges” and transformations
“that it can yield him any profit.” Fixed capital consists of capital invested “in the
improvement of land, in the purchase of useful machines and instruments of trade,
or in such-like things.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 243-44)
“Every saving in the expense of supporting the fixed capital is an improvement of
the net revenue of the society. The whole capital of the undertaker of every work
is necessarily divided between his fixed and his circulating capital. [Marx uses the
French terms capital fixe and capital circulant. – Ed.] While his whole capital
16 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
remains the same, the smaller the one part, the greater must necessarily be the
other. It is the circulating capital which furnishes the materials and wages of labor,
and puts industry into motion. Every saving, therefore, in the expense of
maintaining the fixed capital, which does not diminish the productive powers of
labor, must increase the fund which puts industry into motion.” (Adam Smith, op.
cit., Vol. I, p. 257)
It is clear from the outset that the relation of fixed capital and circulating capital is much more
favorable to the big capitalist than to the smaller capitalist. The extra fixed capital required by a
very big banker as against a very small one is insignificant. Their fixed capital amounts to
nothing more than the office. The equipment of the bigger landowner does not increase in
proportion to the size of his estate. Similarly, the credit which a big capitalist enjoys compared
with a smaller one means for him all the greater saving in fixed capital — that is, in the amount of
ready money he must always have at hand. Finally, it is obvious that where industrial labor has
reached a high level, and where therefore almost all manual labor has become factory labor, the
entire capital of a small capitalist does not suffice to provide him even with the necessary fixed
capital. [As is well known, large-scale cultivation usually provides employment only for a small
number of hands. Note by Marx in French.]
It is generally true that the accumulation of large capital is also accompanied by a proportional
concentration and simplification of fixed capital, as compared to the smaller capitalists. The big
capitalist introduces for himself some kind of organization of the instruments of labor.
“Similarly, in the sphere of industry every manufactory and mill is already a
comprehensive combination of a large material fortune with numerous and varied
intellectual capacities and technical skills serving the common purpose of
production.... Where legislation preserves landed property in large units, the
surplus of a growing population flocks into trades, and it is therefore as in Great
Britain in the field of industry, principally, that proletarians aggregate in great
numbers. Where, however, the law permits the continuous division of the land, the
number of small, debt-encumbered proprietors increases, as in France; and the
continuing process of fragmentation throws them into the class of the needy and
the discontented. When eventually this fragmentation and indebtedness reaches a
higher degree still, big landed property once more swallows up small property,
just as large-scale industry destroys small industry. And as larger estates are
formed again, large numbers of propertyless workers not required for the
cultivation of the soil are again driven into industry.” (Schulz, Bewegung der
Production, pp. 58, 59.)
“Commodities of the same kind change in character as a result of changes in the
method of production, and especially as a result of the use of machinery. Only by
the exclusion of human power has it become possible to spin from a pound of
cotton worth 3 shillings and 8 pence 350 hanks of a total length of 167 English
miles (i.e., 36 German miles), and of a commercial value of 25 guineas.” (op. cit.,
p. 62.)
“On the average the prices of cotton-goods have decreased in England during the
past 45 years by eleven-twelfths, and according to Marshall’s calculations the
same amount of manufactured goods for which 16 shillings was still paid in 1814
is now supplied at 1 shilling and 10 pence. The greater cheapness of industrial
products expands both consumption at home and the market abroad, and because
of this the number of workers in cotton has not only not fallen in Great Britain
after the introduction of machines but has risen from forty thousand to one and a
half million. As to the earnings of industrial entrepreneurs and workers, the
growing competition between the factory owners has resulted in their profits
17 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
necessarily falling relative to the amount of products supplied by them. In the
years 1820-33 the Manchester manufacturer’s gross profit on a piece of calico fell
from four shillings 1 1/3 pence to one shilling 9 pence. But to make up for this
loss, the volume of manufacture has been correspondingly increased. The
consequence of this is that separate branches of industry experience overproduction to some extent, that frequent bankruptcies occur causing property to
fluctuate and vacillate unstably within the class of capitalists and masters of labor,
thus throwing into the proletariat some of those who have been ruined
economically; and that, frequently and suddenly, close-downs or cuts in
employment become necessary, the painful effects of which are always bitterly
felt by the class of wage-laborers.” (Op. cit., p. 63.)
“To hire out one’s labor is to begin one’s enslavement. To hire out the materials of
labor is to establish one’s freedom.... Labor is man; the materials, on the other
hand, contain nothing human.” (Pecqueur, Théorie sociale, etc.)
“The material element, which is quite incapable of creating wealth without the
other element, labor, acquires the magical virtue of being fertile for them [who
own this material element] as if by their own action they had placed there this
indispensable element.” (Op. cit.)
“Supposing that the daily labor of a worker brings him on the average 400 francs a
year and that this sum suffices for every adult to live some sort of crude life, then
any proprietor receiving 2,000 francs in interest or rent, from a farm, a house, etc.,
compels indirectly five men to work for him; an income of 100,000 francs
represents the labor of 250 men, and that of 1,000,000 francs the labor of 2,500
individuals (hence, 300 million [Louis Philippe] therefore the labor of 750,000
workers).” (Op. cit., pp. 412-13.)
‘The human law has given owners the right to use and to abuse — that is to say,
the right to do what they will with the materials of labor.... They are in no way
obliged by law to provide work for the propertyless when required and at all
times, or to pay them always an adequate wage, etc. (Op. cit., p. 413.) “Complete
freedom concerning the nature, the quantity, the quality and the expediency of
production; concerning the use and the disposal of wealth; and full command over
the materials of all labor. Everyone is free to exchange what belongs to him as he
thinks fit, without considering anything other than his own interest as an
individual.” (Op. cit. p. 413.)
“Competition is merely the expression of the freedom to exchange, which itself is
the immediate and logical consequence of the individual’s right to use and abuse
all the instruments of production. The right to use and abuse, freedom of
exchange, and arbitrary competition — these three economic moments, which
form one unit, entail the following consequences; each produces what he wishes,
as he wishes, when he wishes, where he wishes, produces well or produces badly,
produces too much or not enough, too soon or too late, at too high a price or too
low a price; none knows whether he will sell, to whom he will sell, how he will
sell, when he will sell, where he will sell. And it is the same with regard to
purchases. The producer is ignorant of needs and resources, of demand and
supply. He sells when he wishes, when he can, where he wishes, to whom he
wishes, at the price he wishes. And he buys in the same way. In all this he is ever
the plaything of chance, the slave of the law of the strongest, of the least harassed,
of the richest.... Whilst at one place there is scarcity, at another there is glut and
waste. Whilst one producer sells a lot or at a very high price, and at an enormous
profit, the other sells nothing or sells at a loss.... The supply does not know the
demand, and the demand does not know the supply. You produce, trusting to a
18 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
taste, a fashion, which prevails amongst the consuming public. But by the time
you are ready to deliver the commodity, the whim has already passed and has
settled on some other kind of product.... The inevitable consequences:
bankruptcies occurring constantly and universally; miscalculations, sudden ruin
and unexpected fortunes, commercial crises, stoppages, periodic gluts or
shortages; instability and depreciation of wages and profits, the loss or enormous
waste of wealth, time and effort in the arena of fierce competition.” (Op. cit., pp.
414-16.)
Ricardo in his book [On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (rent of land)]:
Nations are merely production-shops; man is a machine for consuming and producing; human life
is a kind of capital; economic laws blindly rule the world. For Ricardo men are nothing, the
product everything. In the 26th chapter of the French translation it says:
“To an individual with a capital of £20,000 whose profits were £2,000 per annum,
it would he a matter quite indifferent whether his capital would employ a hundred
or a thousand men.... Is not the real interest of the nation similar? Provided its net
real income, its rent and profits be the same, it is of no importance whether the
nation consists of ten or twelve millions of inhabitants.” — [t. II, pp. 194, 195.]
“In fact, says M. Sismondi (Nouveaux principes diconomie politique, t. II, p. 331),
nothing remains to be desired but that the King, living quite alone on the island,
should by continuously turning a crank cause automatons to do all the work of
England.”13
“The master who buys the worker’s labor at such a low price that it scarcely
suffices for the worker’s most pressing needs is responsible neither for the
inadequacy of the wage nor for the excessive duration of the labor: he himself has
to submit to the law which he imposes.... Poverty is not so much caused by men as
by the power of things.” (Buret, op. cit., p. 82.)
“The inhabitants of many different parts of Great Britain have not capital
sufficient to improve and cultivate all their lands. The wool of the southern
counties of Scotland is, a great part of it, after a long land carriage through very
bad roads, manufactured in Yorkshire, for want of capital to manufacture it at
home. There are many little manufacturing towns in Great Britain, of which the
inhabitants have not capital sufficient to transport the produce of their own
industry to those distant markets where there is demand and consumption for it. If
there are any merchants among them, they are properly only the agents of
wealthier merchants who reside in some of the greater commercial cities.” (Adam
Smith, Wealth of Nations, Vol. I, pp. 326-27)
“The annual produce of the land and labor of any nation can be increased in its
value by no other means but by increasing either the number of its productive
laborers, or the productive power of those laborers who had before been
employed.... In either case an additional capital is almost always required.” (Adam
Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 306-07.)
“As the accumulation of stock must, in the nature of things, be previous to the
division of labor, so labor can be more and more subdivided in proportion only as
stock is previously more and more accumulated. The quantity of materials which
the same number of people can work up, increases in a great proportion as labor
comes to be more and more subdivided; and as the operations of each workman
are gradually reduced to a greater degree of simplicity, a variety of new machines
come to be invented for facilitating and abridging those operations. As the
division of labor advances, therefore, in order to give constant employment to an
equal number of workmen, an equal stock of provisions, and a greater stock of
19 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
materials and tools than what would have been necessary in a ruder state of things,
must be accumulated beforehand. But the number of workmen in every branch of
business generally increases with the division of labor in that branch, or rather it is
the increase of their number which enables them to class and subdivide
themselves in this manner.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 241-42)
“As the accumulation of stock is previously necessary for carrying on this great
improvement in the productive powers of labor, so that accumulation naturally
leads to this improvement. The person who employs his stock in maintaining
labor, necessarily wishes to employ it in such a manner as to produce as great a
quantity of work as possible. He endeavors, therefore, both to make among his
workmen the most proper distribution of employment, and to furnish them with
the best machines [... ]. His abilities in both these respects are generally in
proportion to the extent of his stock, or to the number of people whom it can
employ. The quantity of industry, therefore, not only increases in every country
with the increase of the stock which employs it, but, in consequence of that
increase, the same quantity of industry produces a much greater quantity of work.”
(Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 242) Hence overproduction.
“More comprehensive combinations of productive forces ... in industry and trade
by uniting more numerous and more diverse human and natural powers in largerscale enterprises. Already here and there, closer association of the chief branches
of production. Thus, big manufacturers will try to acquire also large estates in
order to become independent of others for at least a part of the raw materials
required for their industry; or they will go into trade in conjunction with their
industrial enterprises, not only to sell their own manufactures, but also to purchase
other kinds of products and to sell these to their workers. In England, where a
single factory owner sometimes employs ten to twelve thousand workers ... it is
already not uncommon to find such combinations of various branches of
production controlled by one brain, such smaller states or provinces within the
state. Thus, the mine owners in the Birmingham area have recently taken over the
whole process of iron production, which was previously distributed among
various entrepreneurs and owners, (See “Der bergmännische Distrikt bei
Birmingham,” Deutsche Vierteljahr-Schrift No. 3, 1838.) Finally in the large
joint-stock enterprises which have become so numerous, we see far-reaching
combinations of the financial resources of many participants with the scientific
and technical knowledge and skills of others to whom the carrying-out of the work
is handed over. The capitalists are thereby enabled to apply their savings in more
diverse ways and perhaps even to employ them simultaneously in agriculture,
industry and commerce. As a consequence their interest becomes more
comprehensive, and the contradictions between agricultural, industrial, and
commercial interests are reduced and disappear. But this increased possibility of
applying capital profitably in the most diverse ways cannot but intensify the
antagonism between the propertied and the non-propertied classes.” (Schulz, op.
cit., pp. 40-4l.)
The enormous profit which the landlords of houses make out of poverty. House rent stands in
inverse proportion to industrial poverty. So does the interest obtained from the vices of the ruined
proletarians. (Prostitution, drunkenness, pawnbroking.)
The accumulation of capital increases and the competition between capitalists decreases, when
capital and landed property are united in the same hand, also when capital is enabled by its size to
combine different branches of production.
Indifference towards men. Smith’s twenty lottery-tickets.14 Say’s net and gross revenue. |XVI||
20 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
Rent of Land
Landlords’ right has its origin in robbery. (Say, t. 1) The landlords, like all other
men, love to reap where they never sowed, and demand a rent even for the natural
produce of the earth. (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 44.)
“The rent of land, it may be thought, is frequently no more than a reasonable
profit or interest for the stock laid out by the landlord upon its improvement. This,
no doubt, may be partly the case upon some occasions.... The landlord demands”
(1) “a rent even for unimproved land, and the supposed interest or profit upon the
expense of improvement is generally an addition to this original rent.” (2) “Those
improvements, besides, are not always made by the stock of the landlord, but
sometimes by that of the tenant. When the lease comes to be renewed, however,
the landlord commonly demands the same augmentation of rent as if they had
been all made by his own.” (3) “He sometimes demands rent for what is altogether
incapable of human improvement.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 131.)
Smith cites as an instance of the last case kelp,
“a species of seaweed, which, when burnt, yields an alkaline salt, useful for
making glass, soap, etc. It grows in several parts of Great Britain, particularly in
Scotland, upon such rocks only as lie within the high-water mark, which are twice
every day covered with the sea, and of which the produce, therefore, was never
augmented by human industry. The landlord, however, whose estate is bounded
by a kelp shore of this kind, demands a rent for it as much as for his corn fields.
The sea in the neighborhood of the Islands of Shetland is more than commonly
abundant in fish, which make a great part of the subsistence of their inhabitants.
But in order to profit by the produce of the water they must have a habitation upon
the neighboring land. The rent of the landlord is in proportion, not to what the
farmer can make by the land, but to what he can make both by the land and by the
water.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 131.)
“This rent may be considered as the produce of those powers of nature, the use of
which the landlord lends to the farmer. It is greater or smaller according to the
supposed extent of those powers, or in other words, according to the supposed
natural or improved fertility of the land. It is the work of nature which remains
after deducting or compensating everything which can be regarded as the work of
man.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 324-25.)
“The rent of land, therefore, considered as the price paid for the use of the land, is
naturally a monopoly price. It is not at all proportioned to what the landlord may
have laid out upon the improvement of the land, or to what he can afford to take;
but to what the farmer can afford to give.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., p. 131.)
Of the three original classes, that of the landlords is the one “whose revenue costs
them neither labor nor care, but comes to them, as it were, of its own accord, and
independent of any plan or project of their own”. (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p.
230.)
We have already learnt that the size of the rent depends on the degree of fertility of the land.
Another factor in its determination is situation.
“The rent of land not only varies with its fertility, whatever be its produce, but
with its situation whatever be its fertility.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 133.)
“The produce of land, mines, and fisheries, when their natural fertility is equal, is
in proportion to the extent and proper application of the capitals employed about
them. When the capitals are equal and equally well applied, it is in proportion to
their natural fertility.” (Op. cit., Vol. I, p. 249.)
21 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
These propositions of Smith are important, because, given equal costs of production and capital
of equal size, they reduce the rent of land to the greater or lesser fertility of the soil. Thereby
showing clearly the perversion of concepts in political economy, which turns the fertility of the
land into an attribute of the landlord.
Now, however, let us consider the rent of land as it is formed in real life.
The rent of land is established as a result of the struggle between tenant and landlord. We find
that the hostile antagonism of interests, the struggle, the war is recognised throughout political
economy as the basis of social organization.
Let us see now what the relations are between landlord and tenant.
“In adjusting the terms of the lease, the landlord endeavors to leave him no greater
share of the produce than what is sufficient to keep up the stock from which he
furnishes the seed, pays the labor, and purchases and maintains the cattle and
other instruments of husbandry, together with the ordinary profits of farming stock
in the neighborhood. This is evidently the smallest share with which the tenant can
content himself without being a loser, and the landlord seldom means to leave him
any more. Whatever part of the produce, or, what is the same thing, whatever part
of its price is over and above this share, he naturally endeavors to reserve to
himself as the rent of his land, which is evidently the highest the tenant can afford
to pay in the actual circumstances of the land. [.... ] This portion, however, may
still be considered as the natural rent of land, or the rent for which it is naturally
meant that land should for the most part be let.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, pp.
130-31)
“The landlords,” says Say, “operate a certain kind of monopoly against the
tenants. The demand for their commodity, site and soil, can go on expanding
indefinitely; but there is only a given, limited amount of their commodity.... The
bargain struck between landlord and tenant is always advantageous to the former
in the greatest possible degree.... Besides the advantage he derives from the nature
of the case, he derives a further advantage from his position, his larger fortune and
greater credit and standing. But the first by itself suffices to enable him and him
alone to profit from the favorable circumstances of the land. The opening of a
canal, or a road; the increase of population and of the prosperity of a district,
always raises the rent.... Indeed, the tenant himself may improve the ground at his
own expense; but he only derives the profit from this capital for the duration of his
lease, with the expiry of which it remains with the proprietor of the land;
henceforth it is the latter who reaps the interest thereon, without having made the
outlay, for there is now a proportionate increase in the rent.” (Say, t. II.)
“Rent, considered as the price paid for the use of land, is naturally the highest
which the tenant can afford to pay in the actual circumstances of the land.” (Adam
Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 130.)
“The rent of an estate above ground commonly amounts to what is supposed to be
a third of the gross produce; and it is generally a rent certain and independent of
the occasional variations in the crop.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 153.) This
rent “is seldom less than a fourth ... of the whole produce”. (Op. cit., Vol. I, p.
325.)
Rent cannot be paid on all commodities. For instance, in many districts no rent is paid for stones.
“Such parts only of the produce of land can commonly be brought to market of
which the ordinary price is sufficient to replace the stock which must be employed
in bringing them thither, together with its ordinary profits. If the ordinary price is
more than this, the surplus part of it will naturally go to the rent of the land. If it is
22 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
not more, though the commodity may be brought to market, it can afford no rent
to the landlord. Whether the price is or is not more depends upon the demand.”
(Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 132.)
“Rent, it is to be observed, therefore, enters into the composition of the price of
commodities in a different way from wages and profit. High or low wages and
profit are the causes of high or low price; high or low rent is the effect of it.”
(Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 132.)
Food belongs to the products which always yield a rent.
As men, like all other animals, naturally multiply in proportion to the means of
their subsistence, food is always, more or less, in demand. It can always purchase
or command a greater or smaller quantity of labor, and somebody can always be
found who is willing to do something in order to obtain it. The quantity of labor,
indeed, which it can purchase is not always equal to what it could maintain, if
managed in the most economical manner, on account of the high wages which are
sometimes given to labor. But it can always purchase such a quantity of labor as it
can maintain, according to the rate at which the sort of labor is commonly
maintained in the neighborhood.
“But land, in almost any situation, produces a greater quantity of food than what is
sufficient to maintain all the labor necessary for bringing it to market [.... ] The
surplus, too, is always more than sufficient to replace the stock which employed
that labor, together with its profits. Something, therefore, always remains for a
rent to the landlord.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 132-33.)
“Food is in this manner not only the original source of rent, but every other part of
the produce of land which afterwards affords rent derives that part of its value
from the improvement of the powers of labor in producing food by means of the
improvement and cultivation of land.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 150.)
“Human food seems to be the only produce of land which always and necessarily
affords some rent to the landlord.” (Op. cit., Vol. I, p. 147.)
“Countries are populous not in proportion to the number of people whom their
produce can clothe and lodge, but in proportion to that of those whom it can feed.”
(Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 149.)
“After food, clothing and lodging are the two great wants of mankind.” They
usually yield a rent, but not inevitably. (Op. cit., Vol. I, p. 147.)
15 Let us now see how the landlord exploits everything from which society benefits.
(1) The rent of land increases with population. (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 146.)
(2) We have already learnt from Say how the rent of land increases with railways, etc., with the
improvement, safety, and multiplication of the means of communication.
(3) “Every improvement in the circumstances of the society tends either directly
or indirectly to raise the real rent of land, to increase the real wealth of the
landlord, his power of purchasing the labor, or the produce of the labor of other
people.
“The extension of improvement and cultivation tends to raise it directly. The
landlord’s share of the produce necessarily increases with the increase of the
produce.
“That rise in the real price of those parts of the rude produce of land [...] the rise in
the price of cattle, for example, tends too to raise the rent of land directly, and in a
still greater proportion. The real value of the landlord’s share, his real command
of the labor of other people, not only rises with the real value of the produce, but
the proportion of his share to the whole produce rises with it. That produce, after
23 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
the rise in its real price, requires no more labor to collect it than before. A smaller
proportion of it will, therefore, be sufficient to replace, with the ordinary profit,
the stock which employs that labor. A greater proportion of it must, consequently,
belong to the landlord.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 228-29.)
The greater demand for raw produce, and therefore the rise in value, may in part result from the
increase of population and from the increase of their needs. But every new invention, every new
application in manufacture of a previously unused or little-used raw material, augments rent.
Thus, for example, there was a tremendous rise in the rent of coal mines with the advent of the
railways, steamships, etc.
Besides this advantage which the landlord derives from manufacture, discoveries, and labor, there
is yet another, as we shall presently see.
(4) “All those improvements in the productive powers of labor, which tend
directly to reduce the real price of manufactures, tend indirectly to raise the real
rent of land. The landlord exchanges that part of his rude produce, which is over
and above his own consumption, or what comes to the same thing, the price of
that part of it, for manufactured produce. Whatever reduces the real price of the
latter, raises that of the former. An equal quantity of the former becomes thereby
equivalent to a greater quantity of the latter; and the landlord is enabled to
purchase a greater quantity of the conveniences, ornaments, or luxuries, which he
has occasion for.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 229)
But it is silly to conclude, as Smith does, that since the landlord exploits every benefit which
comes to society the interest of the landlord is always identical with that of society. (Op. cit., Vol.
I, p. 230.) In the economic system, under the rule of private property, the interest which an
individual has in society is in precisely inverse proportion to the interest society has in him —
just as the interest of the usurer in the spendthrift is by no means identical with the interest of the
spendthrift.
We shall mention only in passing the landlord’s obsession with monopoly directed against the
landed property of foreign countries, from which the Corn Laws16, for instance, originate.
Likewise, we shall here pass over medieval serfdom, the slavery in the colonies, and the
miserable condition of the country folk, the day-laborers, in Great Britain. Let us confine
ourselves to the propositions of political economy itself.
(1) The landlord being interested in the welfare of society means, according to the principles of
political economy, that he is interested in the growth of its population and manufacture, in the
expansion of its needs — in short, in the increase of wealth; and this increase of wealth is, as we
have already seen, identical with the increase of poverty and slavery. The relation between
increasing house rent and increasing poverty is an example of the landlord’s interest in society,
for the ground rent, the interest obtained from the land on which the house stands, goes up with
the rent of the house.
(2) According to the political economists themselves, the landlord’s interest is inimically opposed
to the interest of the tenant farmer-and thus already to a significant section of society.
(3) As the landlord can demand all the more rent from the tenant farmer the less wages the farmer
pays, and as the farmer forces down wages all the lower the more rent the landlord demands, it
follows that the interest of the landlord is just as hostile to that of the farm workers as is that of
the manufacturers to their workers. He likewise forces down wages to the minimum.
(4) Since a real reduction in the price of manufactured products raises the rent of land, the
landowner has a direct interest in lowering the wages of industrial workers, in competition
amongst the capitalists, in over-production, in all the misery associated with industrial
production.
24 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
(5) While, thus, the landlord’s interest, far from being identical with the interest of society, stands
inimically opposed to the interest of tenant farmers, farm laborers, factory workers and capitalists,
on the other hand, the interest of one landlord is not even identical with that of another, on
account of the competition which we will now consider.
In general the relationship of large and small landed property is like that of big and small capital.
But in addition, there are special circumstances which lead inevitably to the accumulation of large
landed property and to the absorption of small property by it.
(1) Nowhere does the relative number of workers and implements decrease more with increases
in the size of the stock than in landed property. Likewise, the possibility of all-round exploitation,
of economizing production costs, and of effective division of labor, increases nowhere more with
the size of the stock than in landed property. However small a field may be, it requires for its
working a certain irreducible minimum of implements (plough, saw, etc.), whilst the size of a
piece of landed property can be reduced far below this minimum.
(2) Big landed property accumulates to itself the interest on the capital which the tenant farmer
has employed to improve the land. Small landed property has to employ its own capital, and
therefore does not get this profit at all.
(3) While every social improvement benefits the big estate, it harms small property, because it
increases its need for ready cash.
(4) Two important laws concerning this competition remain to be considered:
(a) The rent of the cultivated land, of which the produce is human food, regulates
the rent of the greater part of other cultivated land. (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I,
p. 144.)
Ultimately, only the big estate can produce such food as cattle, etc. Therefore it regulates the rent
of other land and can force it down to a minimum.
The small landed proprietor working on his own land stands then to the big landowner in the
same relation as an artisan possessing his own tool to the factory owner. Small property in land
has become a mere instrument of labor.17 Rent entirely disappears for the small proprietor; there
remains to him at the most the interest on his capital, and his wages. For rent can be driven down
by competition till it is nothing more than the interest on capital not invested by the proprietor.
(b) In addition, we have already learnt that with equal fertility and equally efficient exploitation
of lands, mines and fisheries, the produce is proportionate to the size of the capital. Hence the
victory of the big landowner. Similarly, where equal capitals are employed the product is
proportionate to the fertility. Hence, where capitals are equal, victory goes to the proprietor of the
more fertile soil.
(c) “A mine of any kind may be said to be either fertile or barren, according as the
quantity of mineral which can be brought from it by a certain quantity of labor is
greater or less than what can be brought by an equal quantity from the greater part
of other mines of the same kind.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 151.)
“The most fertile coal-mine, too, regulates the price of coal at all the other mines
in its neighborhood. Both the proprietor and the undertaker of the work find, the
one that he can get a greater rent, the other that he can get a greater profit, by
somewhat underselling all their neighbors. Their neighbors are soon obliged to
sell at the same price, though they cannot so well afford it, and though it always
diminishes, and sometimes takes away altogether both their rent and their profit.
Some works are abandoned altogether; others can afford no rent, and can be
wrought only by the proprietor.” (Adam Smith, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 152-53.)
“After the discovery of the mines of Peru, the silver mines of Europe were, the
greater part of them, abandoned.... This was the case, too, with the mines of Cuba
25 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
and St. Domingo, and even with the ancient mines of Peru, after the discovery of
those of Potosi.” (Op. cit., Vol. I, p. 154.)
What Smith here says of mines applies more or less to landed property generally:
(d) “The ordinary market price of land, it is to be observed, depends everywhere
upon the ordinary market rate of interest.... If the rent of land should fall short of
the interest of money by a greater difference, nobody would buy land, which
would soon reduce its ordinary price. On the contrary, if the advantages should
much more than compensate the difference, everybody would buy land, which
again would soon raise its ordinary price.” (Op. cit., Vol. I, p. 320.)
From this relation of rent of land to interest on money it follows that rent must fall more and
more, so that eventually only the wealthiest people can live on rent. Hence the ever greater
competition between landowners who do not lease their land to tenants. Ruin of some of these;
further accumulation of large landed property.
This competition has the further consequence that a large part of landed property falls into the
hands of the capitalists and that capitalists thus become simultaneously landowners, just as the
smaller landowners are on the whole already nothing more than capitalists. Similarly, a section of
large landowners become at the same time industrialists.
The final consequence is thus the abolition of the distinction between capitalist and landowner, so
that there remain altogether only two classes of the population — the working class and the class
of capitalists. This huckstering with landed property, the transformation of landed property into a
commodity, constitutes the final overthrow of the old and the final establishment of the money
aristocracy.
(1) We will not join in the sentimental tears wept over this by romanticism. Romanticism always
confuses the shamefulness of huckstering the land with the perfectly rational consequence,
inevitable and desirable within the realm of private property, of the huckstering of private
property in land. In the first place, feudal landed property is already by its very nature huckstered
land — the earth which is estranged from man and hence confronts him in the shape of a few
great lords.
The domination of the land as an alien power over men is already inherent in feudal landed
property. The serf is the adjunct of the land. Likewise, the lord of an entailed estate, the first-born
son, belongs to the land. It inherits him. Indeed, the dominion of private property begins with
property in land — that is its basis. But in feudal landed property the lord at least appears as the
king of the estate. Similarly, there still exists the semblance of a more intimate connection
between the proprietor and the land than that of mere material wealth. The estate is individualized
with its lord: it has his rank, is baronial or ducal with him, has his privileges, his jurisdiction, his
political position, etc. It appears as the inorganic body of its lord. Hence the proverb nulle terre
sans maître [There is no land without its master. – Ed.], which expresses the fusion of nobility
and landed property. Similarly, the rule of landed property does not appear directly as the rule of
mere capital. For those belonging to it, the estate is more like their fatherland. It is a constricted
sort of nationality.
In the same way, feudal landed property gives its name to its lord, as does a kingdom to its king.
His family history, the history of his house, etc. — all this individualizes the estate for him and
makes it literally his house, personifies it. Similarly those working on the estate have not the
position of day-laborers; but they are in part themselves his property, as are serfs; and in part they
are bound to him by ties of respect, allegiance, and duty. His relation to them is therefore directly
political, and has likewise a human, intimate side. Customs, character, etc., vary from one estate
to another and seem to be one with the land to which they belong; whereas later, it is only his
purse and not his character, his individuals , which connects a man with an estate. Finally, the
feudal lord does not try to extract the utmost advantage from his land. Rather, he consumes what
26 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
is there and calmly leaves the worry of producing to the serfs and the tenants. Such is nobility’s
relationship to landed property, which casts a romantic glory on its lords.
It is necessary that this appearance be abolished — that landed property, the root of private
property, be dragged completely into the movement of private property and that it become a
commodity; that the rule of the proprietor appear as the undisguised rule of private property, of
capital, freed of all political tincture; that the relationship between proprietor and worker be
reduced to the economic relationship of exploiter and exploited; that all [ ... ] a personal
relationship between the proprietor and his property cease, property becoming merely objective,
material wealth; that the marriage of convenience should take the place of the marriage of honor
with the land; and that the land should likewise sink to the status of a commercial value, like man.
It is essential that that which is the root of landed property — filthy self-interest — make its
appearance, too, in its cynical form. It is essential that the immovable monopoly turn into the
mobile and restless monopoly, into competition; and that the idle enjoyment of the products of
other people’s blood and sweat turn into a bustling commerce in the same commodity. Lastly, it is
essential that in this competition landed property, in the form of capital, manifest its dominion
over both the working class and the proprietors themselves who are either being ruined or raised
by the laws governing the movement of capital. The medieval proverb nulle terre sans seigneur
[There is no land without its lord. – Ed.] is thereby replaced by that other proverb, l’argent n’a
pas de maître [Money knows no master. – Ed.], wherein is expressed the complete domination of
dead matter over man.
(2) Concerning the argument of division or non-division of landed property, the following is to be
observed.
The division of landed property negates the large-scale monopoly of property in land — abolishes
it; but only by generalizing this monopoly. It does not abolish the source of monopoly, private
property. It attacks the existing form, but not the essence, of monopoly. The consequence is that it
falls victim to the laws of private property. For the division of landed property corresponds to the
movement of competition in the sphere of industry. In addition to the economic disadvantages of
such a dividing-up of the instruments of labor, and the dispersal of labor (to be clearly
distinguished from the division of labor: in separated labor the work is not shared out amongst
many, but each carries on the same work by himself, it is a multiplication of the same work), this
division [of land], like that competition [in industry], necessarily turns again into accumulation.
Therefore, where the division of landed property takes place, there remains nothing for it but to
return to monopoly in a still more malignant form, or to negate, to abolish the division of landed
property itself. To do that, however, is not to return to feudal ownership, but to abolish private
property in the soil altogether. The first abolition of monopoly is always its generalization, the
broadening of its existence. The abolition of monopoly, once it has come to exist in its utmost
breadth and inclusiveness, is its total annihilation. Association, applied to land, shares the
economic advantage of large-scale landed property, and first brings to realization the original
tendency inherent in [land] division, namely, equality. In the same way association also reestablishes, now on a rational basis, no longer mediated by serfdom, overlordship and the silly
mysticism of property, the intimate ties of man with the earth, since the earth ceases to be an
object of huckstering, and through free labor and free enjoyment becomes once more a true
personal property of man. A great advantage of the division of landed property is that the masses,
which can no longer resign themselves to servitude, perish through property in a different way
than in industry.
As for large landed property, its defenders have always, sophistically, identified the economic
advantages offered by large-scale agriculture with large-scale landed property, as if it were not
precisely as a result of the abolition of property that this advantage, for one thing, would receive
its greatest possible extension, and, for another, only then would be of social benefit. In the same
way, they have attacked the huckstering spirit of small landed property, as if large landed
27 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
property did not contain huckstering latent within it, even in its feudal form — not to speak of the
modern English form, which combines the landlord’s feudalism with the tenant farmer’s
huckstering and industry.
Just as large landed property can return the reproach of monopoly leveled against it by partitioned
land, since partitioned land is also based on the monopoly of private property, so can partitioned
landed property likewise return to large landed property the reproach of partition, since partition
also prevails there, though in a rigid and frozen form. Indeed, private property rests altogether on
partitioning. Moreover, just as division of the land leads back to large landed property as a form
of capital wealth, so must feudal landed property necessarily lead to partitioning or at least fall
into the hands of the capitalists, turn and twist as it may.
For large landed property, as in England, drives the overwhelming majority of the population into
the arms of industry and reduces its own workers to utter wretchedness. Thus, it engenders and
enlarges the power of its enemy, capital, industry, by throwing poor people and an entire activity
of the country on to the other side. It makes the majority of the people of the country industrial
and thus opponents of large landed property. Where industry has attained to great power, as in
England at the present time, it progressively forces from large landed property its monopoly
against foreign countries and throws it into competition with landed property abroad. For under
the sway of industry landed property could keep its feudal grandeur secure only by means of
monopolies against foreign countries, thereby protecting itself against the general laws of trade,
which are incompatible with its feudal character. Once thrown into competition, landed property
obeys the laws of competition, like every other commodity subjected to competition. It begins
thus to fluctuate, to decrease and to increase, to fly from one hand to another; and no law can
keep it any longer in a few predestined hands. The immediate consequence is the splitting up of
the land amongst many hands, and in any case subjection to the power of industrial capitals.
Finally, large landed property which has been forcibly preserved in this way and which has
begotten by its side a tremendous industry leads to crisis even more quickly than the partitioning
of land, in comparison with which the power of industry remains constantly of second rank.
Large landed property, as we see in England, has already cast off its feudal character and adopted
an industrial character insofar as it is aiming to make as much money as possible. To the owner it
yields the utmost possible rent, to the tenant farmer the utmost possible profit on his capital. The
workers on the land, in consequence, have already been reduced to the minimum, and the class of
tenant farmers already represents within landed property the power of industry and capital. As a
result of foreign competition, rent in most cases can no longer form an independent income. A
large number of landowners are forced to displace tenant farmers, some of whom in this way [ ...]
sink into the proletariat. On the other hand, many tenant farmers will take over landed property;
for the big proprietors, who with their comfortable incomes have mostly given themselves over to
extravagance and for the most part are not competent to conduct large-scale agriculture, often
possess neither the capital nor the ability for the exploitation of the land. Hence a section of this
class, too, is completely ruined. Eventually wages, which have already been reduced to a
minimum, must be reduced yet further, to meet the new competition. This then necessarily leads
to revolution.
Landed property had to develop in each of these two ways so as to experience in both its
necessary downfall, just as industry both in the form of monopoly and in that of competition had
to ruin itself so as to learn to believe in man. |XXI||
28 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
[Estranged Labor]
||XXII| We have proceeded from the premises of political economy. We have accepted its
language and its laws. We presupposed private property, the separation of labor, capital and land,
and of wages, profit of capital and rent of land – likewise division of labor, competition, the
concept of exchange value, etc. On the basis of political economy itself, in its own words, we
have shown that the worker sinks to the level of a commodity and becomes indeed the most
wretched of commodities; that the wretchedness of the worker is in inverse proportion to the
power and magnitude of his production; that the necessary result of competition is the
accumulation of capital in a few hands, and thus the restoration of monopoly in a more terrible
form; and that finally the distinction between capitalist and land rentier, like that between the
tiller of the soil and the factory worker, disappears and that the whole of society must fall apart
into the two classes – property owners and propertyless workers.
Political economy starts with the fact of private property; it does not explain it to us. It expresses
in general, abstract formulas the material process through which private property actually passes,
and these formulas it then takes for laws. It does not comprehend these laws – i.e., it does not
demonstrate how they arise from the very nature of private property. Political economy throws no
light on the cause of the division between labor and capital, and between capital and land. When,
for example, it defines the relationship of wages to profit, it takes the interest of the capitalists to
be the ultimate cause, i.e., it takes for granted what it is supposed to explain. Similarly,
competition comes in everywhere. It is explained from external circumstances. As to how far
these external and apparently accidental circumstances are but the expression of a necessary
course of development, political economy teaches us nothing. We have seen how exchange itself
appears to it as an accidental fact. The only wheels which political economy sets in motion are
greed, and the war amongst the greedy – competition. [After this paragraph the following
sentence is crossed out in the manuscript: “We now have to examine the nature of this material
movement of property.” – Ed.]
Precisely because political economy does not grasp the way the movement is connected, it was
possible to oppose, for instance, the doctrine of competition to the doctrine of monopoly, the
doctrine of the freedom of the crafts to the doctrine of the guild, the doctrine of the division of
landed property to the doctrine of the big estate – for competition, freedom of the crafts and the
division of landed property were explained and comprehended only as accidental, premeditated
and violent consequences of monopoly, of the guild system, and of feudal property, not as their
necessary, inevitable and natural consequences.
Now, therefore, we have to grasp the intrinsic connection between private property, greed, the
separation of labor, capital and landed property; the connection of exchange and competition, of
value and the devaluation of man, of monopoly and competition, etc. – the connection between
this whole estrangement and the money system.
Do not let us go back to a fictitious primordial condition as the political economist does, when he
tries to explain. Such a primordial condition explains nothing; it merely pushes the question away
into a grey nebulous distance. The economist assumes in the form of a fact, of an event, what he
is supposed to deduce – namely, the necessary relationship between two things – between, for
example, division of labor and exchange. Thus the theologian explains the origin of evil by the
fall of man – that is, he assumes as a fact, in historical form, what has to be explained.
We proceed from an actual economic fact.
The worker becomes all the poorer the more wealth he produces, the more his production
increases in power and size. The worker becomes an ever cheaper commodity the more
commodities he creates. The devaluation of the world of men is in direct proportion to the
increasing value of the world of things. Labor produces not only commodities; it produces itself
29 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
and the worker as a commodity – and this at the same rate at which it produces commodities in
general.
This fact expresses merely that the object which labor produces – labor’s product – confronts it as
something alien, as a power independent of the producer. The product of labor is labor which has
been embodied in an object, which has become material: it is the objectification of labor. Labor’s
realization is its objectification. Under these economic conditions this realization of labor appears
as loss of realization for the workers;18 objectification as loss of the object and bondage to it;
appropriation as estrangement, as alienation.
19
So much does labor’s realization appear as loss of realization that the worker loses realization to
the point of starving to death. So much does objectification appear as loss of the object that the
worker is robbed of the objects most necessary not only for his life but for his work. Indeed, labor
itself becomes an object which he can obtain only with the greatest effort and with the most
irregular interruptions. So much does the appropriation of the object appear as estrangement that
the more objects the worker produces the less he can possess and the more he falls under the sway
of his product, capital.
All these consequences are implied in the statement that the worker is related to the product of his
labor as to an alien object. For on this premise it is clear that the more the worker spends himself,
the more powerful becomes the alien world of objects which he creates over and against himself,
the poorer he himself – his inner world – becomes, the less belongs to him as his own. It is the
same in religion. The more man puts into God, the less he retains in himself. The worker puts his
life into the object; but now his life no longer belongs to him but to the object. Hence, the greater
this activity, the more the worker lacks objects. Whatever the product of his labor is, he is not.
Therefore, the greater this product, the less is he himself. The alienation of the worker in his
product means not only that his labor becomes an object, an external existence, but that it exists
outside him, independently, as something alien to him, and that it becomes a power on its own
confronting him. It means that the life which he has conferred on the object confronts him as
something hostile and alien.
||XXIII| Let us now look more closely at the objectification, at the production of the worker; and
in it at the estrangement, the loss of the object, of his product.
The worker can create nothing without nature, without the sensuous external world. It is the
material on which his labor is realized, in which it is active, from which, and by means of which
it produces.
But just as nature provides labor with [the] means of life in the sense that labor cannot live
without objects on which to operate, on the other hand, it also provides the means of life in the
more restricted sense, i.e., the means for the physical subsistence of the worker himself.
Thus the more the worker by his labor appropriates the external world, sensuous nature, the more
he deprives himself of means of life in two respects: first, in that the sensuous external world
more and more ceases to be an object belonging to his labor – to be his labor’s means of life; and,
second, in that it more and more ceases to be means of life in the immediate sense, means for the
physical subsistence of the worker.
In both respects, therefore, the worker becomes a servant of his object, first, in that he receives an
object of labor, i.e., in that he receives work, and, secondly, in that he receives means of
subsistence. This enables him to exist, first as a worker; and second, as a physical subject. The
height of this servitude is that it is only as a worker that he can maintain himself as a physical
subject and that it is only as a physical subject that he is a worker.
(According to the economic laws the estrangement of the worker in his object is expressed thus:
the more the worker produces, the less he has to consume; the more values he creates, the more
valueless, the more unworthy he becomes; the better formed his product, the more deformed
becomes the worker; the more civilized his object, the more barbarous becomes the worker; the
30 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
more powerful labor becomes, the more powerless becomes the worker; the more ingenious labor
becomes, the less ingenious becomes the worker and the more he becomes nature’s servant.)
Political economy conceals the estrangement inherent in the nature of labor by not considering
the direct relationship between the worker (labor) and production. It is true that labor produces
for the rich wonderful things – but for the worker it produces privation. It produces palaces – but
for the worker, hovels. It produces beauty – but for the worker, deformity. It replaces labor by
machines, but it throws one section of the workers back into barbarous types of labor and it turns
the other section into a machine. It produces intelligence – but for the worker, stupidity,
cretinism.
The direct relationship of labor to its products is the relationship of the worker to the objects of
his production. The relationship of the man of means to the objects of production and to
production itself is only a consequence of this first relationship – and confirms it. We shall
consider this other aspect later. When we ask, then, what is the essential relationship of labor we
are asking about the relationship of the worker to production.
Till now we have been considering the estrangement, the alienation of the worker only in one of
its aspects , i.e., the worker’s relationship to the products of his labor. But the estrangement is
manifested not only in the result but in the act of production, within the producing activity, itself.
How could the worker come to face the product of his activity as a stranger, were it not that in the
very act of production he was estranging himself from himself? The product is after all but the
summary of the activity, of production. If then the product of labor is alienation, production itself
must be active alienation, the alienation of activity, the activity of alienation. In the estrangement
of the object of labor is merely summarized the estrangement, the alienation, in the activity of
labor itself.
What, then, constitutes the alienation of labor?
First, the fact that labor is external to the worker, i.e., it does not belong to his intrinsic nature;
that in his work, therefore, he does not affirm himself but denies himself, does not feel content
but unhappy, does not develop freely his physical and mental energy but mortifies his body and
ruins his mind. The worker therefore only feels himself outside his work, and in his work feels
outside himself. He feels at home when he is not working, and when he is working he does not
feel at home. His labor is therefore not voluntary, but coerced; it is forced labor. It is therefore
not the satisfaction of a need; it is merely a means to satisfy needs external to it. Its alien
character emerges clearly in the fact that as soon as no physical or other compulsion exists, labor
is shunned like the plague. External labor, labor in which man alienates himself, is a labor of selfsacrifice, of mortification. Lastly, the external character of labor for the worker appears in the fact
that it is not his own, but someone else’s, that it does not belong to him, that in it he belongs, not
to himself, but to another. Just as in religion the spontaneous activity of the human imagination,
of the human brain and the human heart, operates on the individual independently of him – that
is, operates as an alien, divine or diabolical activity – so is the worker’s activity not his
spontaneous activity. It belongs to another; it is the loss of his self.
As a result, therefore, man (the worker) only feels himself freely active in his animal functions –
eating, drinking, procreating, or at most in his dwelling and in dressing-up, etc.; and in his human
functions he no longer feels himself to be anything but an animal. What is animal becomes
human and what is human becomes animal.
Certainly eating, drinking, procreating, etc., are also genuinely human functions. But taken
abstractly, separated from the sphere of all other human activity and turned into sole and ultimate
ends, they are animal functions.
We have considered the act of estranging practical human activity, labor, in two of its aspects. (1)
The relation of the worker to the product of labor as an alien object exercising power over him.
This relation is at the same time the relation to the sensuous external world, to the objects of
31 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
nature, as an alien world inimically opposed to him. (2) The relation of labor to the act of
production within the labor process. This relation is the relation of the worker to his own activity
as an alien activity not belonging to him; it is activity as suffering, strength as weakness,
begetting as emasculating, the worker’s own physical and mental energy, his personal life – for
what is life but activity? – as an activity which is turned against him, independent of him and not
belonging to him. Here we have self-estrangement, as previously we had the estrangement of the
thing.
||XXIV| We have still a third aspect of estranged labor to deduce from the two already
considered.
Man is a species-being,20 not only because in practice and in theory he adopts the species (his
own as well as those of other things) as his object, but – and this is only another way of
expressing it – also because he treats himself as the actual, living species; because he treats
himself as a universal and therefore a free being.
The life of the species, both in man and in animals, consists physically in the fact that man (like
the animal) lives on organic nature; and the more universal man (or the animal) is, the more
universal is the sphere of inorganic nature on which he lives. Just as plants, animals, stones, air,
light, etc., constitute theoretically a part of human consciousness, partly as objects of natural
science, partly as objects of art – his spiritual inorganic nature, spiritual nourishment which he
must first prepare to make palatable and digestible – so also in the realm of practice they
constitute a part of human life and human activity. Physically man lives only on these products of
nature, whether they appear in the form of food, heating, clothes, a dwelling, etc. The universality
of man appears in practice precisely in the universality which makes all nature his inorganic body
– both inasmuch as nature is (1) his direct means of life, and (2) the material, the object, and the
instrument of his life activity. Nature is man’s inorganic body – nature, that is, insofar as it is not
itself human body. Man lives on nature – means that nature is his body, with which he must
remain in continuous interchange if he is not to die. That man’s physical and spiritual life is
linked to nature means simply that nature is linked to itself, for man is a part of nature.
In estranging from man (1) nature, and (2) himself, his own active functions, his life activity,
estranged labor estranges the species from man. It changes for him the life of the species into a
means of individual life. First it estranges the life of the species and individual life, and secondly
it makes individual life in its abstract form the purpose of the life of the species, likewise in its
abstract and estranged form.
For labor, life activity, productive life itself, appears to man in the first place merely as a means of
satisfying a need – the need to maintain physical existence. Yet the productive life is the life of
the species. It is life-engendering life. The whole character of a species, its species-character, is
contained in the character of its life activity; and free, conscious activity is man’s speciescharacter. Life itself appears only as a means to life.
The animal is immediately one with its life activity. It does not distinguish itself from it. It is its
life activity. Man makes his life activity itself the object of his will and of his consciousness. He
has conscious life activity. It is not a determination with which he directly merges. Conscious life
activity distinguishes man immediately from animal life activity. It is just because of this that he
is a species-being. Or it is only because he is a species-being that he is a conscious being, i.e., that
his own life is an object for him. Only because of that is his activity free activity. Estranged labor
reverses the relationship, so that it is just because man is a conscious being that he makes his life
activity, his essential being, a mere means to his existence.
In creating a world of objects by his personal activity, in his work upon inorganic nature, man
proves himself a conscious species-being, i.e., as a being that treats the species as his own
essential being, or that treats itself as a species-being. Admittedly animals also produce. They
build themselves nests, dwellings, like the bees, beavers, ants, etc. But an animal only produces
32 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
what it immediately needs for itself or its young. It produces one-sidedly, whilst man produces
universally. It produces only under the dominion of immediate physical need, whilst man
produces even when he is free from physical need and only truly produces in freedom therefrom.
An animal produces only itself, whilst man reproduces the whole of nature. An animal’s product
belongs immediately to its physical body, whilst man freely confronts his product. An animal
forms only in accordance with the standard and the need of the species to which it belongs, whilst
man knows how to produce in accordance with the standard of every species, and knows how to
apply everywhere the inherent standard to the object. Man therefore also forms objects in
accordance with the laws of beauty.
It is just in his work upon the objective world, therefore, that man really proves himself to be a
species-being. This production is his active species-life. Through this production, nature appears
as his work and his reality. The object of labor is, therefore, the objectification of man’s specieslife: for he duplicates himself not only, as in consciousness, intellectually, but also actively, in
reality, and therefore he sees himself in a world that he has created. In tearing away from man the
object of his production, therefore, estranged labor tears from him his species-life, his real
objectivity as a member of the species and transforms his advantage over animals into the
disadvantage that his inorganic body, nature, is taken from him.
Similarly, in degrading spontaneous, free activity to a means, estranged labor makes man’s
species-life a means to his physical existence.
The consciousness which man has of his species is thus transformed by estrangement in such a
way that species [-life] becomes for him a means.
Estranged labor turns thus:
(3) Man’s species-being, both nature and his spiritual species-property, into a being alien to him,
into a means of his individual existence. It estranges from man his own body, as well as external
nature and his spiritual aspect, his human aspect.
(4) An immediate consequence of the fact that man is estranged from the product of his labor,
from his life activity, from his species-being, is the estrangement of man from man. When man
confronts himself, he confronts the other man. What applies to a man’s relation to his work, to the
product of his labor and to himself, also holds of a man’s relation to the other man, and to the
other man’s labor and object of labor.
In fact, the proposition that man’s species-nature is estranged from him means that one man is
estranged from the other, as each of them is from man’s essential nature.
The estrangement of man, and in fact every relationship in which man [stands] to himself, is
realized and expressed only in the relationship in which a man stands to other men.
Hence within the relationship of estranged labor each man views the other in accordance with the
standard and the relationship in which he finds himself as a worker.
||XXV| We took our departure from a fact of political economy – the estrangement of the worker
and his production. We have formulated this fact in conceptual terms as estranged, alienated
labor. We have analyzed this concept – hence analyzing merely a fact of political economy.
Let us now see, further, how the concept of estranged, alienated labor must express and present
itself in real life.
If the product of labor is alien to me, if it confronts me as an alien power, to whom, then, does it
belong?
To a being other than myself.
Who is this being?
The gods? To be sure, in the earliest times the principal production (for example, the building of
temples, etc., in Egypt, India and Mexico) appears to be in the service of the gods, and the
33 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
product belongs to the gods. However, the gods on their own were never the lords of labor. No
more was nature. And what a contradiction it would be if, the more man subjugated nature by his
labor and the more the miracles of the gods were rendered superfluous by the miracles of
industry, the more man were to renounce the joy of production and the enjoyment of the product
to please these powers.
The alien being, to whom labor and the product of labor belongs, in whose service labor is done
and for whose benefit the product of labor is provided, can only be man himself.
If the product of labor does not belong to the worker, if it confronts him as an alien power, then
this can only be because it belongs to some other man than the worker. If the worker’s activity is
a torment to him, to another it must give satisfaction and pleasure. Not the gods, not nature, but
only man himself can be this alien power over man.
We must bear in mind the previous proposition that man’s relation to himself becomes for him
objective and actual through his relation to the other man. Thus, if the product of his labor, his
labor objectified, is for him an alien, hostile, powerful object independent of him, then his
position towards it is such that someone else is master of this object, someone who is alien,
hostile, powerful, and independent of him. If he treats his own activity as an unfree activity, then
he treats it as an activity performed in the service, under the dominion, the coercion, and the yoke
of another man.
Every self-estrangement of man, from himself and from nature, appears in the relation in which
he places himself and nature to men other than and differentiated from himself. For this reason
religious self-estrangement necessarily appears in the relationship of the layman to the priest, or
again to a mediator, etc., since we are here dealing with the intellectual world. In the real
practical world self-estrangement can only become manifest through the real practical
relationship to other men. The medium through which estrangement takes place is itself practical.
Thus through estranged labor man not only creates his relationship to the object and to the act of
production as to powers [in the manuscript Menschen (men) instead of Mächte (powers). – Ed.]
that are alien and hostile to him; he also creates the relationship in which other men stand to his
production and to his product, and the relationship in which he stands to these other men. Just as
he creates his own production as the loss of his reality, as his punishment; his own product as a
loss, as a product not belonging to him; so he creates the domination of the person who does not
produce over production and over the product. Just as he estranges his own activity from himself,
so he confers upon the stranger an activity which is not his own.
We have until now considered this relationship only from the standpoint of the worker and later
on we shall be considering it also from the standpoint of the non-worker.
Through estranged, alienated labor, then, the worker produces the relationship to this labor of a
man alien to labor and standing outside it. The relationship of the worker to labor creates the
relationship to it of the capitalist (or whatever one chooses to call the master of labor). Private
property is thus the product, the result, the necessary consequence, of alienated labor, of the
external relation of the worker to nature and to himself.
Private property thus results by analysis from the concept of alienated labor, i.e., of alienated
man, of estranged labor, of estranged life, of estranged man.
True, it is as a result of the movement of private property that we have obtained the concept of
alienated labor (of alienated life) in political economy. But on analysis of this concept it becomes
clear that though private property appears to be the reason, the cause of alienated labor, it is rather
its consequence, just as the gods are originally not the cause but the effect of man’s intellectual
confusion. Later this relationship becomes reciprocal.
Only at the culmination of the development of private property does this, its secret, appear again,
namely, that on the one hand it is the product of alienated labor, and that on the other it is the
means by which labor alienates itself, the realization of this alienation.
34 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
This exposition immediately sheds light on various hitherto unsolved conflicts.
(1) Political economy starts from labor as the real soul of production; yet to labor it gives
nothing, and to private property everything. Confronting this contradiction, Proudhon has decided
in favor of labor against private property
21. We understand, however, that this apparent
contradiction is the contradiction of estranged labor with itself, and that political economy has
merely formulated the laws of estranged labor.
We also understand, therefore, that wages and private property are identical. Indeed, where the
product, as the object of labor, pays for labor itself, there the wage is but a necessary consequence
of labor’s estrangement. Likewise, in the wage of labor, labor does not appear as an end in itself
but as the servant of the wage. We shall develop this point later, and meanwhile will only draw
some conclusions. ||XXVI|
22
An enforced increase of wages (disregarding all other difficulties, including the fact that it would
only be by force, too, that such an increase, being an anomaly, could be maintained) would
therefore be nothing but better payment for the slave, and would not win either for the worker or
for labor their human status and dignity.
Indeed, even the equality of wages, as demanded by Proudhon, only transforms the relationship of
the present-day worker to his labor into the relationship of all men to labor. Society is then
conceived as an abstract capitalist.
Wages are a direct consequence of estranged labor, and estranged labor is the direct cause of
private property. The downfall of the one must therefore involve the downfall of the other.
(2) From the relationship of estranged labor to private property it follows further that the
emancipation of society from private property, etc., from servitude, is expressed in the political
form of the emancipation of the workers; not that their emancipation alone is at stake, but
because the emancipation of the workers contains universal human emancipation – and it contains
this because the whole of human servitude is involved in the relation of the worker to production,
and all relations of servitude are but modifications and consequences of this relation.
Just as we have derived the concept of private property from the concept of estranged, alienated
labor by analysis, so we can develop every category of political economy with the help of these
two factors; and we shall find again in each category, e.g., trade, competition, capital, money only
a particular and developed expression of these first elements.
But before considering this phenomenon, however, let us try to solve two other problems.
(1) To define the general nature of private property, as it has arisen as a result of estranged labor,
in its relation to truly human and social property.
(2) We have accepted the estrangement of labor, its alienation, as a fact, and we have analyzed
this fact. How, we now ask, does man come to alienate, to estrange, his labor? How is this
estrangement rooted in the nature of human development? We have already gone a long way to
the solution of this problem by transforming the question of the origin of private property into the
question of the relation of alienated labor to the course of humanity’s development. For when
one speaks of private property, one thinks of dealing with something external to man. When one
speaks of labor, one is directly dealing with man himself. This new formulation of the question
already contains its solution.
As to (1): The general nature of private property and its relation to truly human property.
Alienated labor has resolved itself for us into two components which depend on one another, or
which are but different expressions of one and the same relationship. Appropriation appears as
estrangement, as alienation; and alienation appears as appropriation, estrangement as truly
becoming a citizen.
23
We have considered the one side – alienated labor in relation to the worker himself, i.e., the
relation of alienated labor to itself. The product, the necessary outcome of this relationship, as we
35 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. First Manuscript
have seen, is the property relation of the non-worker to the worker and to labor. Private property,
as the material, summary expression of alienated labor, embraces both relations – the relation of
the worker to work and to the product of his labor and to the non-worker, and the relation of the
non-worker to the worker and to the product of his labor.
Having seen that in relation to the worker who appropriates nature by means of his labor, this
appropriation appears as estrangement, his own spontaneous activity as activity for another and as
activity of another, vitality as a sacrifice of life, production of the object as loss of the object to an
alien power, to an alien person – we shall now consider the relation to the worker, to labor and its
object of this person who is alien to labor and the worker.
First it has to be noted that everything which appears in the worker as an activity of alienation, of
estrangement, appears in the non-worker as a state of alienation, of estrangement.
Secondly, that the worker’s real, practical attitude in production and to the product (as a state of
mind) appears in the non-worker who confronting him as a theoretical attitude.
||XXVII| Thirdly, the non-worker does everything against the worker which the worker does
against himself; but he does not do against himself what he does against the worker.
Let us look more closely at these three relations. |XXVII||
[First Manuscript breaks off here.]


Second Manuscript
Antithesis of Capital and Labor. Landed Property and Capital
[....] ||XL| forms the interest on his capital. The worker is the subjective manifestation of the fact
that capital is man wholly lost to himself, just as capital is the objective manifestation of the fact
that labor is man lost to himself. But the worker has the misfortune to be a living capital, and
therefore an indigent capital, one which loses its interest, and hence its livelihood, every moment
it is not working. The value of the worker as capital rises according to demand and supply, and
physically too his existence, his life, was and is looked upon as a supply of a commodity like any
other. The worker produces capital, capital produces him – hence he produces himself, and man
as worker, as a commodity, is the product of this entire cycle. To the man who is nothing more
than a worker – and to him as a worker – his human qualities only exist insofar as they exist for
capital alien to him. Because man and capital are alien, foreign to each other, however, and thus
stand in an indifferent, external and accidental relationship to each other, it is inevitable that this
foreignness should also appear as something real. As soon, therefore, as it occurs to capital
(whether from necessity or caprice) no longer to be for the worker, he himself is no longer for
himself: he has no work, hence no wages, and since he has no existence as a human being but
only as a worker, he can go and bury himself, starve to death, etc. The worker exists as a worker
only when he exists for himself as capital; and he exists as capital only when some capital exists
for him. The existence of capital is his existence, his life; as it determines the tenor of his life in a
manner indifferent to him.
Political economy, therefore, does not recognize the unemployed worker, the workingman,
insofar as he happens to be outside this labor relationship. The rascal, swindler, beggar, the
unemployed, the starving, wretched and criminal workingman – these are figures who do not
exist for political economy but only for other eyes, those of the doctor, the judge, the gravedigger, and bum-bailiff, etc.; such figures are specters outside its domain. For it, therefore, the
worker’s needs are but the one need – to maintain him whilst he is working and insofar as may be
necessary to prevent the race of laborers from [dying] out. The wages of labor have thus exactly
the same significance as the maintenance and servicing of any other productive instrument, or as
the consumption of capital in general, required for its reproduction with interest, like the oil
which is applied to wheels to keep them turning. Wages, therefore, belong to capital’s and the
capitalist’s necessary costs, and must not exceed the bounds of this necessity. It was therefore
quite logical for the English factory owners, before the Amendment Bill of 1834, to deduct from
the wages of the worker the public charity which he was receiving out of the Poor Rate and to
consider this to be an integral part of wages.24
Production does not simply produce man as a commodity, the human commodity, man in the role
of commodity; it produces him in keeping with this role as a mentally and physically dehumanized
being. – Immorality, deformity, and dulling of the workers and the capitalists. – Its product is the
self-conscious and self-acting commodity ... the human commodity.... Great advance of Ricardo,
Mill, etc., on Smith and Say, to declare the existence of the human being – the greater or lesser
human productivity of the commodity – to be indifferent and even harmful. Not how many
workers are maintained by a given capital, but rather how much interest it brings in, the sum-total
of the annual savings, is said to be the true purpose of production.
It was likewise a great and consistent advance of modern ||XLI| English political economy, that,
whilst elevating labor to the position of its sole principle, it should at the same time expound with
complete clarity the inverse relation between wages and interest on capital, and the fact that the
capitalist could normally only gain by pressing down wages, and vice versa. Not the defrauding

37 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Second Manuscript
of the consumer, but the capitalist and the worker taking advantage of each other, is shown to be
the normal relationship.
The relations of private property contain latent within them the relation of private property as
labor, the relation of private property as capital, and the mutual relation of these two to one
another. There is the production of human activity as labor – that is, as an activity quite alien to
itself, to man and to nature, and therefore to consciousness and the expression of life – the
abstract existence of man as a mere workman who may therefore daily fall from his filled void
into the absolute void – into his social, and therefore actual, non-existence. On the other hand,
there is the production of the object of human activity as capital – in which all the natural and
social characteristic of the object is extinguished; in which private property has lost its natural and
social quality (and therefore every political and social illusion, and is not associated with any
apparently human relations); in which the selfsame capital remains the same in the most diverse
natural and social manifestations, totally indifferent to its real content. This contradiction, driven
to the limit, is of necessity the limit, the culmination, and the downfall of the whole privateproperty relationship.
It is therefore another great achievement of modern English political economy to have declared
rent of land to be the difference in the interest yielded by the worst and the best land under
cultivation; to have [exposed] the landowner’s romantic illusions – his alleged social importance
and the identity of his interest with the interest of society, a view still maintained by Adam Smith
after the Physiocrats; and to [have] anticipated and prepared the movement of the real world
which will transform the landowner into an ordinary, prosaic capitalist, and thus simplify and
sharpen the contradiction [between capital and labor] and hasten its resolution. Land as land, and
rent as rent, have lost their distinction of rank and become insignificant capital and interest – or
rather, capital and interest that signify only money.
The distinction between capital and land, between profit and rent, and between both and wages,
and industry, and agriculture, and immovable and movable private property – this distinction is
not rooted in the nature of things, but is a historical distinction, a fixed historical moment in the
formation and development of the contradiction between capital and labor. In industry, etc., as
opposed to immovable landed property, is only expressed the way in which [industry] came into
being and the contradiction to agriculture in which industry developed. This distinction only
continues to exist as a special sort of work – as an essential, important and life-embracing
distinction – so long as industry (town life) develops over and against landed property
(aristocratic feudal life) and itself continues to bear the feudal character of its opposite in the form
of monopoly, craft, guild, corporation, etc., within which labor still has a seemingly social
significance, still the significance of the real community, and has not yet reached the stage of
indifference to its content, of complete being-for-self 25, i.e., of abstraction from all other being,
and hence has not yet become liberated capital.
||XLII| But liberated industry, industry constituted for itself as such, and liberated capital, are the
necessary development of labor. The power of industry over its opposite is at once revealed in the
emergence of agriculture as a real industry, while previously it left most of the work to the soil
and to the slave of the soil, through whom the land cultivated itself. With the transformation of
the slave into a free worker – i.e., into a hireling – the landlord himself is transformed into a
captain of industry, into a capitalist – a transformation which takes place at first through the
intermediacy of the tenant farmer. The tenant farmer, however, is the landowner’s representative
– the landowner’s revealed secret: it is only through him that the landowner has his economic
existence – his existence as a private proprietor – for the rent of his land only exists due to the
competition between the farmers.
Thus, in the person of the tenant farmer the landlord has already become in essence a common
capitalist. And this must come to pass, too, in actual fact: the capitalist engaged in agriculture –
38 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Second Manuscript
the tenant – must become a landlord, or vice versa. The tenant’s industrial hucksterism is the
landowner’s industrial hucksterism, for the being of the former postulates the being of the latter.
But mindful of their contrasting origin, of their line of descent, the landowner knows the capitalist
as his insolent, liberated, enriched slave of yesterday and sees himself as a capitalist who is
threatened by him. The capitalist knows the landowner as the idle, cruel, egotistical master of
yesterday; he knows that he injures him as a capitalist, but that it is to industry that he owes all his
present social significance, his possessions and his pleasures; he sees in him [the landowner] a
contradiction to free industry and to free capital – to capital independent of every natural
limitation. This contradiction [between landowner and capitalist] is extremely bitter, and each
side tells the truth about the other. One need only read the attacks of immovable on movable
property and vice versa to obtain a clear picture of their respective worthlessness. The landowner
lays stress on the noble lineage of his property, on feudal souvenirs or reminiscences, the poetry
of recollection, on his romantic disposition, on his political importance, etc.; and when he talks
economics, it is only agriculture that he holds to be productive. At the same time he depicts his
adversary as a sly, hawking, carping, deceitful, greedy, mercenary, rebellious, heart- and soulless
person who is estranged from the community and freely trades it away, who breeds, nourishes
and cherishes competition, and with it pauperism, crime, and the dissolution of all social bonds,
an extorting, pimping, servile, smooth, flattering, fleecing, dried-up rogue without honor,
principles, poetry, substance, or anything else. (Amongst others see the Physiocrat Bergasse,
whom Camille Desmoulins flays in his journal, Révolutions de France et de Brabant26; see von
Vincke, Lancizolle, Haller, Leo, Kosegarten and also Sismondi.)
[See on the other hand the garrulous, old-Hegelian theologian Funke who tells, after Herr Leo,
with tears in his eyes how a slave had refused, when serfdom was abolished, to cease being the
property of the gentry27. See also the patriotic visions of Justus Möser, which distinguish
themselves by the fact that they never for a moment [...] abandon the respectable, petty-bourgeois
"home-baked", ordinary, narrow horizon of the philistine, and which nevertheless remain pure
fancy. This contradiction has given them such an appeal to the German heart. - Note by Marx.]
Movable property, for its part, points to the miracles of industry and progress. It is the child of
modern times, whose legitimate, native-born son it is. It pities its adversary as a simpleton,
unenlightened about his own nature (and in this it is completely right), who wants to replace
moral capital and free labor by brute, immoral violence and serfdom. It depicts him as a Don
Quixote, who under the guise of bluntness, respectability, the general interest, and stability,
conceals incapacity for progress, greedy self-indulgence, selfishness, sectional interest, and evil
intent. It declares him an artful monopolist; it pours cold water on his reminiscences, his poetry,
and his romanticism by a historical and sarcastic enumeration of the baseness, cruelty,
degradation, prostitution, infamy, anarchy and rebellion, of which romantic castles were the
workshops.
||XLIII| It claims to have obtained political freedom for everybody; to have loosed the chains
which fettered civil society; to have linked together different worlds; to have created trade
promoting friendship between the peoples; to have created pure morality and a pleasant culture;
to have given the people civilized needs in place of their crude wants, and the means of satisfying
them. Meanwhile, it claims, the landowner – this idle, parasitic grain-profiteer – raises the price
of the people’s basic necessities and so forces the capitalist to raise wages without being able to
increase productivity, thus impeding [the growth of] the nation’s annual income, the
accumulation of capital, and therefore the possibility of providing work for the people and wealth
for the country, eventually cancelling it, thus producing a general decline – whilst he parasitically
exploits every advantage of modern civilization without doing the least thing for it, and without
even abating in the slightest his feudal prejudices. Finally, let him – for whom the cultivation of
the land and the land itself exist only as a source of money, which comes to him as a present – let
him just take a look at his tenant farmer and say whether he himself is not a downright, fantastic,
39 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Second Manuscript
sly scoundrel who in his heart and in actual fact has for a long time belonged to free industry and
to lovely trade, however much he may protest and prattle about historical memories and ethical or
political goals. Everything which he can really advance to justify himself is true only of the
cultivator of the land (the capitalist and the laborers), of whom the landowner is rather the enemy.
Thus he gives evidence against himself. [Movable property claims that] without capital landed
property is dead, worthless matter; that its civilized victory has discovered and made human labor
the source of wealth in place of the dead thing. (See Paul Louis Courier, Saint-Simon, Ganilh,
Ricardo, Mill, McCulloch and Destutt de Tracy and Michel Chevalier.)
The real course of development (to be inserted at this point) results in the necessary victory of the
capitalist over the landowner – that is to say, of developed over undeveloped, immature private
property – just as in general, movement must triumph over immobility; open, self-conscious
baseness over hidden, unconscious baseness; cupidity over self-indulgence; the avowedly restless,
adroit self-interest of enlightenment over the parochial, worldly-wise, respectable, idle and
fantastic self-interest of superstition; and money over the other forms of private property.
Those states which sense something of the danger attaching to fully developed free industry, to
fully developed pure morality and to fully developed philanthropic trade, try, but in vain, to hold
in check the capitalization of landed property.
Landed property in its distinction from capital is private property – capital – still afflicted with
local and political prejudices; it is capital which has not yet extricated itself from its entanglement
with the world and found the form proper to itself – capital not yet fully developed. It must
achieve its abstract, that is, its pure, expression in the course of its cosmogony.
The character of private property is expressed by labor, capital, and the relations between these
two. The movement through which these constituents have to pass is:
First. Unmediated or mediated unity of the two.
Capital and labor are at first still united. Then, though separated and estranged, they reciprocally
develop and promote each other as positive conditions.
[Second.] The two in opposition, mutually excluding each other. The worker knows the capitalist
as his own non-existence, and vice versa: each tries to rob the other of his existence.
[Third.] Opposition of each to itself. Capital = stored-up labor = labor. As such it splits into
capital itself and its interest, and this latter again into interest and profit. The capitalist is
completely sacrificed. He falls into the working class, whilst the worker (but only exceptionally)
becomes a capitalist. Labor as a moment of capital – its costs. Thus the wages of labor – a
sacrifice of capital.
Splitting of labor into labor itself and the wages of labor. The worker himself a capital, a
commodity.
Clash of mutual contradictions. |XLIII||
Third Manuscript28
[Private Property and Labor. Political Economy as a Product of
the Movement of Private Property]
||I| Re. p. XXXVI. The subjective essence of private property – private property as activity for
itself,29 as subject, as person – is labor. It is therefore evident that only the political economy
which acknowledged labor as its principle – Adam Smith – and which therefore no longer looked
upon private property as a mere condition external to man – that it is this political economy which
has to be regarded on the one hand as a product of the real energy and the real movement of
private property (it is a movement of private property become independent for itself in
consciousness – the modern industry as Self) – as a product of modern industry – and on the other
hand, as a force which has quickened and glorified the energy and development of modern
industry and made it a power in the realm of consciousness.
To this enlightened political economy, which has discovered – within private property – the
subjective essence of wealth, the adherents of the Monetary and Mercantile System, who look
upon private property only as an objective substance confronting men, seem therefore to be
fetishists, Catholics. Engels was therefore right to call Adam Smith the Luther of Political
Economy [See Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy]. Just as Luther recognized religion -
faith - as the substance of the external world and in consequence stood opposed to Catholic
paganism – just as he superseded external religiosity by making religiosity the inner substance of
man - just as he negated the priests outside the layman because he transplanted the priest into
laymen’s hearts, just so with wealth: wealth as something outside man and independent of him,
and therefore as something to be maintained and asserted only in an external fashion, is done
away with; that is, this external, mindless objectivity of wealth is done away with, with private
property being incorporated in man himself and with man himself being recognized as its
essence. But as a result man is brought within the orbit of private property, just as with Luther he
is brought within the orbit of religion. Under the semblance of recognizing man, the political
economy whose principle is labor rather carries to its logical conclusion the denial of man, since
man himself no longer stands in an external relation of tension to the external substance of private
property, but has himself become this tense essence of private property. What was previously
being external to oneself – man’s actual externalization – has merely become the act of
externalizing – the process of alienating.
This political economy begins by seeming to acknowledge man (his independence, spontaneity,
etc.); then, locating private property in man’s own being, it can no longer be conditioned by the
local, national or other characteristics of private property as of something existing outside itself.
This political economy, consequently, displays a cosmopolitan, universal energy which
overthrows every restriction and bond so as to establish itself instead as the sole politics, the sole
universality, the sole limit and sole bond. Hence it must throw aside this hypocrisy in the course
of its further development and come out in its complete cynicism. And this it does – untroubled
by all the apparent contradictions in which it becomes involved as a result of this theory – by
developing the idea of labor much more one-sidedly, and therefore more sharply and more
consistently, as the sole essence of wealth; by proving the implications of this theory to be antihuman in character, in contrast to the other, original approach. Finally, by dealing the death-blow
to rent – that last, individual, natural mode of private property and source of wealth existing
independently of the movement of labor, that expression of feudal property, an expression which
has already become wholly economic in character and therefore incapable of resisting political
economy. (The Ricardo school.) There is not merely a relative growth in the cynicism of political

41 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
economy from Smith through Say to Ricardo, Mill, etc., inasmuch as the implications of industry
appear more developed and more contradictory in the eyes of the last-named; these later
economists also advance in a positive sense constantly and consciously further than their
predecessors in their estrangement from man. They do so, however, only because their science
develops more consistently and truthfully. Because they make private property in its active form
the subject, thus simultaneously turning man into the essence – and at the same time turning man
as non-essentiality into the essence – the contradiction of reality corresponds completely to the
contradictory being which they accept as their principle. Far from refuting it, the ruptured ||II|
world of industry confirms their self-ruptured principle. Their principle is, after all, the principle
of this rupture.
The Physiocratic doctrine of Dr. Quesnay forms the transition from the Mercantile System to
Adam Smith. Physiocracy represents directly the decomposition of feudal property in economic
terms, but it therefore just as directly represents its economic metamorphosis and restoration, save
that now its language is no longer feudal but economic. All wealth is resolved into land and
cultivation (agriculture). Land is not yet capital: it is still a special mode of its existence, the
validity of which is supposed to lie in, and to derive from, its natural peculiarity. Yet land is a
general natural element, whilst the Mercantile System admits the existence of wealth only in the
form of precious metal. Thus the object of wealth – its matter – has straightway obtained the
highest degree of universality within the bounds of nature, insofar as even as nature, it is
immediate objective wealth. And land only exists for man through labor, through agriculture.
Thus the subjective essence of wealth has already been transferred to labor. But at the same time
agriculture is the only productive labor. Hence, labor is not yet grasped in its generality and
abstraction: it is still bound to a particular natural element as its matter, and it is therefore only
recognized in a particular mode of existence determined by nature. It is therefore still only a
specific, particular alienation of man, just as its product is likewise conceived nearly [as] a
specific form of wealth – due more to nature than to labor itself. The land is here still recognized
as a phenomenon of nature independent of man - not yet as capital, i.e., as an aspect of labor
itself. Labor appears, rather, as an aspect of the land. But since the fetishism of the old external
wealth, of wealth existing only as an object, has been reduced to a very simple natural element,
and since its essence – even if only partially and in a particular form – has been recognized within
its subjective existence, the necessary step forward has been made in revealing the general nature
of wealth and hence in the raising up of labor in its total absoluteness (i.e., its abstraction) as the
principle. It is argued against physiocracy that agriculture, from the economic point of view –
that is to say, from the only valid point of view – does not differ from any other industry; and that
the essence of wealth, therefore, is not a specific form of labor bound to a particular element - a
particular expression of labor – but labor in general.
Physiocracy denies particular, external, merely objective wealth by declaring labor to be the
essence of wealth. But for physiocracy labor is at first only the subjective essence of landed
property. (It takes its departure from the type of property which historically appears as the
dominant and acknowledged type.) It turns only landed property into alienated man. It annuls its
feudal character by declaring industry (agriculture) as its essence. But it disavows the world of
industry and acknowledges the feudal system by declaring agriculture to be the only industry.
It is clear that if the subjective essence of industry is now grasped (of industry in opposition to
landed property, i.e., of industry constituting itself as industry), this essence includes within itself
its opposite. For just as industry incorporates annulled landed property, the subjective essence of
industry at the same time incorporates the subjective essence of landed property.
Just as landed property is the first form of private property, with industry at first confronting it
historically merely as a special kind of property – or, rather, as landed property’s liberated slave –
so this process repeats itself in the scientific analysis of the subjective essence of private property,
labor. Labor appears at first only as agricultural labor, but then asserts itself as labor in general.
42 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
||III| All wealth has become industrial wealth, the wealth of labor, and industry is accomplished
labor, just as the factory system is the perfected essence of industry, that is of labor, and just as
industrial capital is the accomplished objective form of private property.
We can now see how it is only at this point that private property can complete its dominion over
man and become, in its most general form, a world-historical power.
[Private Property and Communism]
Re p. XXXIX. The antithesis between lack of property and property, so long as it is not
comprehended as the antithesis of labor and capital, still remains an indifferent antithesis, not
grasped in its active connection, in its internal relation, not yet grasped as a contradiction. It can
find expression in this first form even without the advanced development of private property (as
in ancient Rome, Turkey, etc.). It does not yet appear as having been established by private
property itself. But labor, the subjective essence of private property as exclusion of property, and
capital, objective labor as exclusion of labor, constitute private property as its developed state of
contradiction – hence a dynamic relationship driving towards resolution.
Re the same page. The transcendence of self-estrangement follows the same course as selfestrangement. Private property is first considered only in its objective aspect – but nevertheless
with labor as its essence. Its form of existence is therefore capital, which is to be annulled “as
such” (Proudhon). Or a particular form of labor – labor leveled down, fragmented, and therefore
unfree – is conceived as the source of private property’s perniciousness and of its existence in
estrangement from men. For instance, Fourier, who, like the Physiocrats, also conceives
agricultural labor to be at least the exemplary type, whilst Saint-Simon declares in contrast that
industrial labor as such is the essence, and accordingly aspires to the exclusive rule of the
industrialists and the improvement of the workers’ condition. Finally, communism is the positive
expression of annulled private property – at first as universal private property.
By embracing this relation as a whole, communism is:
(1) In its first form only a generalization and consummation of it [of this relation]. As such it
appears in a two-fold form: on the one hand, the dominion of material property bulks so large that
it wants to destroy everything which is not capable of being possessed by all as private property.
It wants to disregard talent, etc., in an arbitrary manner. For it the sole purpose of life and
existence is direct, physical possession. The category of the worker is not done away with, but
extended to all men. The relationship of private property persists as the relationship of the
community to the world of things. Finally, this movement of opposing universal private property
to private property finds expression in the brutish form of opposing to marriage (certainly a form
of exclusive private property) the community of women, in which a woman becomes a piece of
communal and common property. It may be said that this idea of the community of women gives
away the secret of this as yet completely crude and thoughtless communism.
30 Just as woman
passes from marriage to general prostitution, [Prostitution is only a specific expression of the
general prostitution of the laborer, and since it is a relationship in which falls not the prostitute
alone, but also the one who prostitutes – and the latter’s abomination is still greater – the
capitalist, etc., also comes under this head. – Note by Marx]
31 so the entire world of wealth (that
is, of man’s objective substance) passes from the relationship of exclusive marriage with the
owner of private property to a state of universal prostitution with the community. This type of
communism – since it negates the personality of man in every sphere – is but the logical
expression of private property, which is this negation. General envy constituting itself as a power
is the disguise in which greed re-establishes itself and satisfies itself, only in another way. The
thought of every piece of private property as such is at least turned against wealthier private
property in the form of envy and the urge to reduce things to a common level, so that this envy
and urge even constitute the essence of competition. Crude communism [The manuscript has:
43 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
Kommunist. – Ed.] is only the culmination of this envy and of this leveling-down proceeding
from the preconceived minimum. It has a definite, limited standard. How little this annulment of
private property is really an appropriation is in fact proved by the abstract negation of the entire
world of culture and civilization, the regression to the unnatural ||IV| simplicity of the poor and
crude man who has few needs and who has not only failed to go beyond private property, but has
not yet even reached it.
The community is only a community of labor, and of equality of wages paid out by communal
capital – by the community as the universal capitalist. Both sides of the relationship are raised to
an imagined universality – labor as the category in which every person is placed, and capital as
the acknowledged universality and power of the community.
In the approach to woman as the spoil and handmaid of communal lust is expressed the infinite
degradation in which man exists for himself, for the secret of this approach has its unambiguous,
decisive, plain and undisguised expression in the relation of man to woman and in the manner in
which the direct and natural species-relationship is conceived. The direct, natural, and necessary
relation of person to person is the relation of man to woman. In this natural species-relationship
man’s relation to nature is immediately his relation to man, just as his relation to man is
immediately his relation to nature – his own natural destination. In this relationship, therefore, is
sensuously manifested, reduced to an observable fact, the extent to which the human essence has
become nature to man, or to which nature to him has become the human essence of man. From
this relationship one can therefore judge man’s whole level of development. From the character
of this relationship follows how much man as a species-being, as man, has come to be himself
and to comprehend himself; the relation of man to woman is the most natural relation of human
being to human being. It therefore reveals the extent to which man’s natural behavior has become
human, or the extent to which the human essence in him has become a natural essence – the
extent to which his human nature has come to be natural to him. This relationship also reveals
the extent to which man’s need has become a human need; the extent to which, therefore, the
other person as a person has become for him a need – the extent to which he in his individual
existence is at the same time a social being.
The first positive annulment of private property – crude communism – is thus merely one form in
which the vileness of private property, which wants to set itself up as the positive community
system, comes to the surface.
(2) Communism (a) still political in nature – democratic or despotic; (ß) with the abolition of the
state, yet still incomplete, and being still affected by private property, i.e., by the estrangement of
man. In both forms communism already is aware of being reintegration or return of man to
himself, the transcendence of human self-estrangement; but since it has not yet grasped the
positive essence of private property, and just as little the human nature of need, it remains captive
to it and infected by it. It has, indeed, grasped its concept, but not its essence.
 (3) Communism as the positive transcendence of private property as human self-estrangement,
and therefore as the real appropriation of the human essence by and for man; communism
therefore as the complete return of man to himself as a social (i.e., human) being – a return
accomplished consciously and embracing the entire wealth of previous development. This
communism, as fully developed naturalism, equals humanism, and as fully developed humanism
equals naturalism; it is the genuine resolution of the conflict between man and nature and
between man and man – the true resolution of the strife between existence and essence, between
objectification and self-confirmation, between freedom and necessity, between the individual and
the species. Communism is the riddle of history solved, and it knows itself to be this solution.
||V| The entire movement of history, just as its actual act of genesis – the birth act of its empirical
existence – is, therefore, for its thinking consciousness the comprehended and known process of
its becoming. Whereas the still immature communism seeks an historical proof for itself – a proof
44 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
in the realm of what already exists – among disconnected historical phenomena opposed to
private property, tearing single phases from the historical process and focusing attention on them
as proofs of its historical pedigree (a hobby-horse ridden hard especially by Cabet, Villegardelle,
etc.). By so doing it simply makes clear that by far the greater part of this process contradicts its
own claim, and that, if it has ever existed, precisely its being in the past refutes its pretension to
reality.
It is easy to see that the entire revolutionary movement necessarily finds both its empirical and its
theoretical basis in the movement of private property – more precisely, in that of the economy.
This material, immediately perceptible private property is the material perceptible expression of
estranged human life. Its movement – production and consumption – is the perceptible revelation
of the movement of all production until now, i.e., the realization or the reality of man. Religion,
family, state, law, morality, science, art, etc., are only particular modes of production, and fall
under its general law. The positive transcendence of private property as the appropriation of
human life, is therefore the positive transcendence of all estrangement – that is to say, the return
of man from religion, family, state, etc., to his human, i.e., social, existence. Religious
estrangement as such occurs only in the realm of consciousness, of man’s inner life, but economic
estrangement is that of real life; its transcendence therefore embraces both aspects. It is evident
that the initial stage of the movement amongst the various peoples depends on whether the true
recognized life of the people manifests itself more in consciousness or in the external world – is
more ideal or real. Communism begins from the outset (Owen) with atheism; but atheism is at
first far from being communism; indeed, that atheism is still mostly an abstraction.
The philanthropy of atheism is therefore at first only philosophical, abstract philanthropy, and
that of communism is at once real and directly bent on action.
We have seen how on the assumption of positively annulled private property man produces man –
himself and the other man; how the object, being the direct manifestation of his individuality, is
simultaneously his own existence for the other man, the existence of the other man, and that
existence for him. Likewise, however, both the material of labor and man as the subject, are the
point of departure as well as the result of the movement (and precisely in this fact, that they must
constitute the point of departure, lies the historical necessity of private property). Thus the social
character is the general character of the whole movement: just as society itself produces man as
man, so is society produced by him. Activity and enjoyment, both in their content and in their
mode of existence, are social: social [This word is crossed out in the manuscript. – Ed.] activity
and social enjoyment. The human aspect of nature exists only for social man; for only then does
nature exist for him as a bond with man – as his existence for the other and the other’s existence
for him – and as the life-element of human reality. Only then does nature exist as the foundation
of his own human existence. Only here has what is to him his natural existence become his
human existence, and nature become man for him. Thus society is the complete unity of man with
nature – the true resurrection of nature – the consistent naturalism of man and the consistent
humanism of nature.
||VI| Social activity and social enjoyment exist by no means only in the form of some directly
communal activity and directly communal enjoyment, although communal activity and communal
enjoyment – i.e., activity and enjoyment which are manifested and directly revealed in real
association with other men – will occur wherever such a direct expression of sociability stems
from the true character of the activity’s content and is appropriate to the nature of the enjoyment.
But also when I am active scientifically, etc. – an activity which I can seldom perform in direct
community with others – then my activity is social, because I perform it as a man. Not only is the
material of my activity given to me as a social product (as is even the language in which the
thinker is active): my own existence is social activity, and therefore that which I make of myself,
I make of myself for society and with the consciousness of myself as a social being.
45 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
My general consciousness is only the theoretical shape of that of which the living shape is the
real community, the social fabric, although at the present day general consciousness is an
abstraction from real life and as such confronts it with hostility. The activity of my general
consciousness, as an activity, is therefore also my theoretical existence as a social being.
Above all we must avoid postulating “society” again as an abstraction vis-à-vis the individual.
The individual is the social being. His manifestations of life – even if they may not appear in the
direct form of communal manifestations of life carried out in association with others – are
therefore an expression and confirmation of social life. Man’s individual and species-life are not
different, however much – and this is inevitable – the mode of existence of the individual is a
more particular or more general mode of the life of the species, or the life of the species is a
more particular or more general individual life.
In his consciousness of species man confirms his real social life and simply repeats his real
existence in thought, just as conversely the being of the species confirms itself in speciesconsciousness and exists for itself in its generality as a thinking being.
Man, much as he may therefore be a particular individual (and it is precisely his particularity
which makes him an individual, and a real individual social being), is just as much the totality –
the ideal totality – the subjective existence of imagined and experienced society for itself; just as
he exists also in the real world both as awareness and real enjoyment of social existence, and as a
totality of human manifestation of life.
Thinking and being are thus certainly distinct, but at the same time they are in unity with each
other.
Death seems to be a harsh victory of the species over the particular individual and to contradict
their unity. But the particular individual is only a particular species-being, and as such mortal.
<(4) [In the manuscript: “5”. – Ed.] Just as private property is only the perceptible expression of
the fact that man becomes objective for himself and at the same time becomes to himself a
strange and inhuman object; just as it expresses the fact that the manifestation of his life is the
alienation of his life, that his realization is his loss of reality, is an alien reality: so, the positive
transcendence of private property – i.e., the perceptible appropriation for and by man of the
human essence and of human life, of objective man, of human achievements – should not be
conceived merely in the sense of immediate, one-sided enjoyment, merely in the sense of
possessing, of having. Man appropriates his total essence in a total manner, that is to say, as a
whole man. Each of his human relations to the world – seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, feeling,
thinking, observing, experiencing, wanting, acting, loving – in short, all the organs of his
individual being, like those organs which are directly social in their form, ||VII| are in their
objective orientation, or in their orientation to the object, the appropriation of the object, the
appropriation of human reality. Their orientation to the object is the manifestation of the human
reality, [For this reason it is just as highly varied as the determinations of human essence and
activities. – Note by Marx.] it is human activity and human suffering, for suffering, humanly
considered, is a kind of self-enjoyment of man.
Private property has made us so stupid and one-sided that an object is only ours when we have it
– when it exists for us as capital, or when it is directly possessed, eaten, drunk, worn, inhabited,
etc., – in short, when it is used by us. Although private property itself again conceives all these
direct realizations of possession only as means of life, and the life which they serve as means is
the life of private property – labor and conversion into capital.
In the place of all physical and mental senses there has therefore come the sheer estrangement of
all these senses, the sense of having. The human being had to be reduced to this absolute poverty
in order that he might yield his inner wealth to the outer world. [On the category of “having”, see
Hess, in the Philosophy of the Deed].
46 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
The transcendence of private property is therefore the complete emancipation of all human senses
and qualities, but it is this emancipation precisely because these senses and attributes have
become, subjectively and objectively, human. The eye has become a human eye, just as its object
has become a social, human object – an object made by man for man. The senses have therefore
become directly in their practice theoreticians. They relate themselves to the thing for the sake of
the thing, but the thing itself is an objective human relation to itself and to man, [In practice I can
relate myself to a thing humanly only if the thing relates itself humanly to the human being. –
Note by Marx.] and vice versa. Need or enjoyment have consequently lost their egotistical nature,
and nature has lost its mere utility by use becoming human use.
In the same way, the senses and enjoyment of other men have become my own appropriation.
Besides these direct organs, therefore, social organs develop in the form of society; thus, for
instance, activity in direct association with others, etc., has become an organ for expressing my
own life, and a mode of appropriating human life.
It is obvious that the human eye enjoys things in a way different from the crude, non-human eye;
the human ear different from the crude ear, etc.
We have seen that man does not lose himself in his object only when the object becomes for him
a human object or objective man. This is possible only when the object becomes for him a social
object, he himself for himself a social being, just as society becomes a being for him in this
object.
On the one hand, therefore, it is only when the objective world becomes everywhere for man in
society the world of man’s essential powers – human reality, and for that reason the reality of his
own essential powers – that all objects become for him the objectification of himself, become
objects which confirm and realize his individuality, become his objects: that is, man himself
becomes the object. The manner in which they become his depends on the nature of the objects
and on the nature of the essential power corresponding to it; for it is precisely the determinate
nature of this relationship which shapes the particular, real mode of affirmation. To the eye an
object comes to be other than it is to the ear, and the object of the eye is another object than the
object of the ear. The specific character of each essential power is precisely its specific essence,
and therefore also the specific mode of its objectification, of its objectively actual, living being.
Thus man is affirmed in the objective world not only in the act of thinking, ||VIII| but with all his
senses.
On the other hand, let us look at this in its subjective aspect. Just as only music awakens in man
the sense of music, and just as the most beautiful music has no sense for the unmusical ear – is
[no] object for it, because my object can only be the confirmation of one of my essential powers,
therefore can only exist for me insofar as my essential power exists for itself as a subjective
capacity because the meaning of an object for me goes only so far as my sense goes (has only a
meaning for a sense corresponding to that object) – for this reason the senses of the social man
differ from those of the non-social man. Only through the objectively unfolded richness of man’s
essential being is the richness of subjective human sensibility (a musical ear, an eye for beauty of
form – in short, senses capable of human gratification, senses affirming themselves as essential
powers of man) either cultivated or brought into being. For not only the five senses but also the
so-called mental senses, the practical senses (will, love, etc.), in a word, human sense, the human
nature of the senses, comes to be by virtue of its object, by virtue of humanized nature. The
forming of the five senses is a labor of the entire history of the world down to the present. The
sense caught up in crude practical need has only a restricted sense.> For the starving man, it is
not the human form of food that exists, but only its abstract existence as food. It could just as well
be there in its crudest form, and it would be impossible to say wherein this feeding activity differs
from that of animals. The care-burdened, poverty-stricken man has no sense for the finest play;
the dealer in minerals sees only the commercial value but not the beauty and the specific
character of the mineral: he has no mineralogical sense. Thus, the objectification of the human
47 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
essence, both in its theoretical and practical aspects, is required to make man’s sense human, as
well as to create the human sense corresponding to the entire wealth of human and natural
substance.
<Just as through the movement of private property, of its wealth as well as its misery– of its
material and spiritual wealth and misery – the budding society finds at hand all the material for
this development, so established society produces man in this entire richness of his being
produces the rich man profoundly endowed with all the senses – as its enduring reality.>
We see how subjectivism and objectivism, spiritualism and materialism, activity and suffering,
only lose their antithetical character, and – thus their existence as such antitheses only within the
framework of society; <we see how the resolution of the theoretical antitheses is only possible in
a practical way, by virtue of the practical energy of man. Their resolution is therefore by no
means merely a problem of understanding, but a real problem of life, which philosophy could not
solve precisely because it conceived this problem as merely a theoretical one.
We see how the history of industry and the established objective existence of industry are the
open book of man’s essential powers, the perceptibly existing human psychology. Hitherto this
was not conceived in its connection with man’s essential being, but only in an external relation of
utility, because, moving in the realm of estrangement, people could only think of man’s general
mode of being – religion or history in its abstract–general character as politics, art, literature, etc.
– ||XI| as the reality of man’s essential powers and man’s species-activity. We have before us the
objectified essential powers of man in the form of sensuous, alien, useful objects, in the form of
estrangement, displayed in ordinary material industry (which can be conceived either as a part of
that general movement, or that movement can be conceived as a particular part of industry, since
all human activity hitherto has been labor – that is, industry – activity estranged from itself).
A psychology for which this, the part of history existing in the most perceptible and accessible
form, remains a closed book, cannot become a genuine, comprehensive and real science.> What
indeed are we to think of a science which airily abstracts from this large part of human labor and
which fails to feel its own incompleteness, while such a wealth of human Endeavour, unfolded
before it, means nothing more to it than, perhaps, what can be expressed in one word – “need”,
“vulgar need”?
The natural sciences have developed an enormous activity and have accumulated an evergrowing mass of material. Philosophy, however, has remained just as alien to them as they remain
to philosophy. Their momentary unity was only a chimerical illusion. The will was there, but the
power was lacking. Historiography itself pays regard to natural science only occasionally, as a
factor of enlightenment, utility, and of some special great discoveries. But natural science has
invaded and transformed human life all the more practically through the medium of industry; and
has prepared human emancipation, although its immediate effect had to be the furthering of the
dehumanization of man. Industry is the actual, historical relationship of nature, and therefore of
natural science, to man. If, therefore, industry is conceived as the exoteric revelation of man’s
essential powers, we also gain an understanding of the human essence of nature or the natural
essence of man. In consequence, natural science will lose its abstractly material – or rather, its
idealistic – tendency, and will become the basis of human science, as it has already become –
albeit in an estranged form – the basis of actual human life, and to assume one basis for life and a
different basis for science is as a matter of course a lie. <The nature which develops in human
history – the genesis of human society – is man’s real nature; hence nature as it develops through
industry, even though in an estranged form, is true anthropological nature.>
Sense-perception (see Feuerbach) must be the basis of all science. Only when it proceeds from
sense-perception in the twofold form of sensuous consciousness and sensuous need – is it true
science. All history is the history of preparing and developing “man” to become the object of
sensuous consciousness, and turning the requirements of “man as man” into his needs. History
48 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
itself is a real part of natural history – of nature developing into man. Natural science will in time
incorporate into itself the science of man, just as the science of man will incorporate into itself
natural science: there will be one science.
||X| Man is the immediate object of natural science; for immediate, sensuous nature for man is,
immediately, human sensuousness (the expressions are identical) – presented immediately in the
form of the other man sensuously present for him. Indeed, his own sensuousness first exists as
human sensuousness for himself through the other man. But nature is the immediate object of the
science of man: the first – object of man – man – is nature, sensuousness; and the particular
human sensuous essential powers can only find their self-understanding in the science of the
natural world in general, just as they can find their objective realization only in natural objects.
The element of thought itself – the element of thought’s living expression – language – is of a
sensuous nature. The social reality of nature, and human natural science, or the natural science of
man, are identical terms.
<It will be seen how in place of the wealth and poverty of political economy come the rich
human being and the rich human need. The rich human being is simultaneously the human being
in need of a totality of human manifestations of life – the man in whom his own realization exists
as an inner necessity, as need. Not only wealth, but likewise the poverty of man – under the
assumption of socialism32 – receives in equal measure a human and therefore social significance.
Poverty is the passive bond which causes the human being to experience the need of the greatest
wealth – the other human being. The dominion of the objective being in me, the sensuous
outburst of my life activity, is passion, which thus becomes here the activity of my being.>
(5) A being only considers himself independent when he stands on his own feet; and he only
stands on his own feet when he owes his existence to himself. A man who lives by the grace of
another regards himself as a dependent being. But I live completely by the grace of another if I
owe him not only the maintenance of my life, but if he has, moreover, created my life – if he is
the source of my life. When it is not of my own creation, my life has necessarily a source of this
kind outside of it. The Creation is therefore an idea very difficult to dislodge from popular
consciousness. The fact that nature and man exist on their own account is incomprehensible to it,
because it contradicts everything tangible in practical life.
The creation of the earth has received a mighty blow from geognosy – i.e., from the science
which presents the formation of the earth, the development of the earth, as a process, as a selfgeneration. Generatio aequivoca is the only practical refutation of the theory of creation.33
Now it is certainly easy to say to the single individual what Aristotle has already said: You have
been begotten by your father and your mother; therefore in you the mating of two human beings –
a species-act of human beings – has produced the human being. You see, therefore, that even
physically man owes his existence to man. Therefore you must not only keep sight of the one
aspect – the infinite progression which leads you further to inquire: Who begot my father? Who
his grandfather? etc. You must also hold on to the circular movement sensuously perceptible in
that progress by which man repeats himself in procreation, man thus always remaining the
subject. You will reply, however: I grant you this circular movement; now grant me the progress
which drives me ever further until I ask: Who begot the first man, and nature as a whole? I can
only answer you: Your question is itself a product of abstraction. Ask yourself how you arrived at
that question. Ask yourself whether your question is not posed from a standpoint to which I
cannot reply, because it is wrongly put. Ask yourself whether that progress as such exists for a
reasonable mind. When you ask about the creation of nature and man, you are abstracting, in so
doing, from man and nature. You postulate them as non-existent, and yet you want me to prove
them to you as existing. Now I say to you: Give up your abstraction and you will also give up
your question. Or if you want to hold on to your abstraction, then be consistent, and if you think
of man and nature as non-existent, ||XI| then think of yourself as non-existent, for you too are
surely nature and man. Don’t think, don’t ask me, for as soon as you think and ask, your
49 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
abstraction from the existence of nature and man has no meaning. Or are you such an egotist that
you conceive everything as nothing, and yet want yourself to exist?
You can reply: I do not want to postulate the nothingness of nature, etc. I ask you about its
genesis, just as I ask the anatomist about the formation of bones, etc.
But since for the socialist man the entire so-called history of the world is nothing but the creation
of man through human labor, nothing but the emergence of nature for man, so he has the visible,
irrefutable proof of his birth through himself, of his genesis. Since the real existence of man and
nature has become evident in practice, through sense experience, because man has thus become
evident for man as the being of nature, and nature for man as the being of man, the question about
an alien being, about a being above nature and man – a question which implies the admission of
the unreality of nature and of man – has become impossible in practice. Atheism, as the denial of
this unreality, has no longer any meaning, for atheism is a negation of God, and postulates the
existence of man through this negation; but socialism as socialism no longer stands in any need of
such a mediation. It proceeds from the theoretically and practically sensuous consciousness of
man and of nature as the essence. Socialism is man’s positive self-consciousness, no longer
mediated through the abolition of religion, just as real life is man’s positive reality, no longer
mediated through the abolition of private property, through communism. Communism is the
positive mode as the negation of the negation, and is hence the actual phase necessary for the
next stage of historical development in the process of human emancipation and rehabilitation.
Communism is the necessary form and the dynamic principle of the immediate future, but
communism as such is not the goal of human development, the form of human society. |XI||34
[Human Requirements and Division of Labor Under the Rule
of Private Property and Under Socialism. Division of Labor in
Bourgeois Society]
||XIV| 35 (7) We have seen what significance, given socialism, the wealth of human needs
acquires, and what significance, therefore, both a new mode of production and a new object of
production obtain: a new manifestation of the forces of human nature and a new enrichment of
human nature. Under private property their significance is reversed: every person speculates on
creating a new need in another, so as to drive him to fresh sacrifice, to place him in a new
dependence and to seduce him into a new mode of enjoyment and therefore economic ruin. Each
tries to establish over the other an alien power, so as thereby to find satisfaction of his own selfish
need. The increase in the quantity of objects is therefore accompanied by an extension of the
realm of the alien powers to which man is subjected, and every new product represents a new
potentiality of mutual swindling and mutual plundering. Man becomes ever poorer as man, his
need for money becomes ever greater if he wants to master the hostile power. The power of his
money declines in inverse proportion to the increase in the volume of production: that is, his
neediness grows as the power of money increases.
The need for money is therefore the true need produced by the economic system, and it is the
only need which the latter produces. The quantity of money becomes to an ever greater degree its
sole effective quality. Just as it reduces everything to its abstract form, so it reduces itself in the
course of its own movement to quantitative being. Excess and intemperance come to be its true
norm.
Subjectively, this appears partly in the fact that the extension of products and needs becomes a
contriving and ever-calculating subservience to inhuman, sophisticated, unnatural and imaginary
appetites. Private property does not know how to change crude need into human need. Its
idealism is fantasy, caprice and whim; and no eunuch flatters his despot more basely or uses more
despicable means to stimulate his dulled capacity for pleasure in order to sneak a favor for
50 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
himself than does the industrial eunuch – the producer – in order to sneak for himself a few pieces
of silver, in order to charm the golden birds out of the pockets of his dearly beloved neighbors in
Christ. He puts himself at the service of the other’s most depraved fancies, plays the pimp
between him and his need, excites in him morbid appetites, lies in wait for each of his weaknesses
– all so that he can then demand the cash for this service of love. (Every product is a bait with
which to seduce away the other’s very being, his money; every real and possible need is a
weakness which will lead the fly to the glue-pot. General exploitation of communal human
nature, just as every imperfection in man, is a bond with heaven – an avenue giving the priest
access to his heart; every need is an opportunity to approach one’s neighbor under the guise of the
utmost amiability and to say to him: Dear friend, I give you what you need, but you know the
conditio sine qua non; you know the ink in which you have to sign yourself over to me; in
providing for your pleasure, I fleece you.)
This estrangement manifests itself in part in that the sophistication of needs and of the means [of
their satisfaction] on one side produces a bestial barbarization, a complete, crude, abstract
simplicity of need, on the other; or rather in that it merely reproduces itself in its opposite. Even
the need for fresh air ceases to be a need for the worker. Man returns to a cave dwelling, which is
now, however, contaminated with the pestilential breath of civilization, and which he continues to
occupy only precariously, it being for him an alien habitation which can be withdrawn from him
any day – a place from which, if he does ||XV| not pay, he can be thrown out any day. For this
mortuary he has to pay. A dwelling in the light, which Prometheus in Aeschylus designated as
one of the greatest boons, by means of which he made the savage into a human being, ceases to
exist for the worker. Light, air, etc. – the simplest animal cleanliness – ceases to be a need for
man. Filth, this stagnation and putrefaction of man – the sewage of civilization (speaking quite
literally) – comes to be the element of life for him. Utter, unnatural depravation, putrefied nature,
comes to be his life-element. None of his senses exist any longer, and not only in its human
fashion, but in an inhuman fashion, and therefore not even in an animal fashion. The crudest
methods (and instruments) of human labor are coming back: the treadmill of the Roman slaves,
for instance, is the means of production, the means of existence, of many English workers. It is
not only that man has no human needs – even his animal needs cease to exist. The Irishman no
longer knows any need now but the need to eat, and indeed only the need to eat potatoes – and
scabby potatoes at that, the worst kind of potatoes. But in each of their industrial towns England
and France have already a little Ireland. The savage and the animal have at least the need to hunt,
to roam, etc. – the need of companionship. The simplification of the machine, of labor is used to
make a worker out of the human being still in the making, the completely immature human being,
the child – whilst the worker has become a neglected child. The machine accommodates itself to
the weakness of the human being in order to make the weak human being into a machine.
<How the multiplication of needs and of the means [of their satisfaction] breeds the absence of
needs and of means is demonstrated by the political economist (and the capitalist: in general it is
always empirical businessmen we are talking about when we refer to political economists, who
are their scientific confession and aspect). This he shows:
(1) By reducing the worker’s need to the barest and most miserable level of physical subsistence,
and by reducing his activity to the most abstract mechanical movement; thus he says: Man has no
other need either of activity or of enjoyment. For he call this life, too, human life and existence.
(2) By counting the most meager form of life (existence) as the standard, indeed, as the general
standard – general because it is applicable to the mass of men. He changes the worker into an
insensible being lacking all needs, just as he changes his activity into a pure abstraction from all
activity. To him, therefore, every luxury of the worker seems to be reprehensible, and everything
that goes beyond the most abstract need – be it in the realm of passive enjoyment, or a
manifestation of activity – seems to him a luxury. Political economy, this science of wealth, is
therefore simultaneously the science of renunciation, of want, of saving – and it actually reaches
51 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
the point where it spares man the need of either fresh air or physical exercise. This science of
marvelous industry is simultaneously the science of asceticism, and its true ideal is the ascetic but
extortionate miser and the ascetic but productive slave. Its moral ideal is the worker who takes
part of his wages to the savings-bank, and it has even found ready-made a servile art which
embodies this pet idea: it has been presented, bathed in sentimentality, on the stage. Thus political
economy – despite its worldly and voluptuous appearance – is a true moral science, the most
moral of all the sciences. Self-renunciation, the renunciation of life and of all human needs, is its
principal thesis. The less you eat, drink and buy books; the less you go to the theater, the dance
hall, the public house; the less you think, love, theorize, sing, paint, fence, etc., the more you save
– the greater becomes your treasure which neither moths nor rust will devour – your capital. The
less you are, the less you express your own life, the more you have, i.e., the greater is your
alienated life, the greater is the store of your estranged being. Everything ||XVI| which the
political economist takes from you in life and in humanity, he replaces for you in money and in
wealth; and all the things which you cannot do, your money can do. It can eat and, drink, go to
the dance hall and the theater; it can travel, it can appropriate art, learning, the treasures of the
past, political power – all this it can appropriate for you – it can buy all this: it is true endowment.
Yet being all this, it wants to do nothing but create itself, buy itself; for everything else is after all
its servant, and when I have the master I have the servant and do not need his servant. All
passions and all activity must therefore be submerged in avarice. The worker may only have
enough for him to want to live, and may only want to live in order to have that.>
It is true that a controversy now arises in the field of political economy. The one side
(Lauderdale, Malthus, etc.) recommends luxury and execrates thrift. The other (Say, Ricardo,
etc.) recommends thrift and execrates luxury. But the former admits that it wants luxury in order
to produce labor (i.e., absolute thrift); and the latter admits that it recommends thrift in order to
produce wealth (i.e., luxury). The Lauderdale-Malthus school has the romantic notion that avarice
alone ought not to determine the consumption of the rich, and it contradicts its own laws in
advancing extravagance as a direct means of enrichment. Against it, therefore, the other side very
earnestly and circumstantially proves that I do not increase but reduce my possessions by being
extravagant. The Say-Ricardo school is hypocritical in not admitting that it is precisely whim and
caprice which determine production. It forgets the “refined needs”; it forgets that there would be
no production without consumption; it forgets that as a result of competition production can only
become more extensive and luxurious. It forgets that, according to its views, a thing’s value is
determined by use, and that use is determined by fashion. It wishes to see only “useful things”
produced, but it forgets that production of too many useful things produces too large a useless
population. Both sides forget that extravagance and thrift, luxury and privation, wealth and
poverty are equal.
And you must not only stint the gratification of your immediate senses, as by stinting yourself on
food, etc.: you must also spare yourself all sharing of general interests, all sympathy, all trust,
etc., if you want to be economical, if you do not want to be ruined by illusions.
<You must make everything that is yours saleable, i.e., useful. If I ask the political economist: Do
I obey economic laws if I extract money by offering my body for sale, by surrendering it to
another’s lust? (The factory workers in France call the prostitution of their wives and daughters
the nth working hour, which is literally correct.) – Or am I not acting in keeping with political
economy if I sell my friend to the Moroccans? (And the direct sale of men in the form of a trade
in conscripts, etc., takes place in all civilized countries.) – Then the political economist replies to
me: You do not transgress my laws; but see what Cousin Ethics and Cousin Religion have to say
about it. My political economic ethics and religion have nothing to reproach you with, but – But
whom am I now to believe, political economy or ethics? – The ethics of political economy is
acquisition, work, thrift, sobriety – but political economy promises to satisfy my needs. – The
political economy of ethics is the opulence of a good conscience, of virtue, etc.; but how can I
52 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
live virtuously if I do not live? And how can I have a good conscience if I do not know anything?
It stems from the very nature of estrangement that each sphere applies to me a different and
opposite yardstick – ethics one and political economy another; for each is a specific estrangement
of man and> ||XVII| focuses attention on a particular field of estranged essential activity, and each
stands in an estranged relation to the other. Thus M. Michel Chevalier reproaches Ricardo with
having ignored ethics. But Ricardo is allowing political economy to speak its own language, and
if it does not speak ethically, this is not Ricardo’s fault. M. Chevalier abstracts from political
economy insofar as he moralizes, but he really and necessarily ignores ethics insofar as he
practices political economy. The relationship of political economy to ethics, if it is other than an
arbitrary, contingent and therefore unfounded and unscientific relationship, if it is not being
posited for the sake of appearance but is meant to be essential, can only be the relationship of the
laws of political economy to ethics. If there is no such connection, or if the contrary is rather the
case, can Ricardo help it? Moreover, the opposition between political economy and ethics is only
an apparent opposition and just as much no opposition as it is an opposition. All that happens is
that political economy expresses moral laws in its own way.
<Frugality as the principle of political economy is most brilliantly shown in its theory of
population. There are too many people. Even the existence of men is a pure luxury; and if the
worker is “ethical”, he will be sparing in procreation. (Mill suggests public acclaim for those who
prove themselves continent in their sexual relations, and public rebuke for those who sin against
such barrenness of marriage.... Is this not ethics, the teaching of asceticism?) The production of
people appears as public misery.>
The meaning which production has in relation to the rich is seen revealed in the meaning which it
has for the poor. Looking upwards the manifestation is always refined, veiled, ambiguous –
outward appearance; downwards, it is rough, straightforward, frank – the real thing. The worker’s
crude need is a far greater source of gain than the refined need of the rich. The cellar dwellings in
London bring more to those who let them than do the palaces; that is to say, with reference to the
landlord they constitute greater wealth, and thus (to speak the language of political economy)
greater social wealth.
Industry speculates on the refinement of needs, it speculates however just as much on their
crudeness, but on their artificially produced crudeness, whose true enjoyment, therefore, is selfstupefaction – this illusory satisfaction of need this civilization contained within the crude
barbarism of need. The English gin shops are therefore the symbolical representations of private
property. Their luxury reveals the true relation of industrial luxury and wealth to man. They are
therefore rightly the only Sunday pleasures of the people which the English police treats at least
mildly. |XVII||
||XVIII| 36 We have already seen how the political economist establishes the unity of labor and
capital in a variety of ways: (1) Capital is accumulated labor. (2) The purpose of capital within
production – partly, reproduction of capital with profit, partly, capital as raw material (material of
labor), and partly, as an automatically working instrument (the machine is capital directly equated
with labor) – is productive labor. (3) The worker is a capital. (4) Wages belong to costs of capital.
(5) In relation to the worker, labor is the reproduction of his life-capital. (6) In relation to the
capitalist, labor is an aspect of his capital’s activity.
Finally, (7) the political economist postulates the original unity of capital and labor as the unity of
the capitalist and the worker; this is the original state of paradise. The way in which these two
aspects, ||XIX| as two persons, confront each other is for the political economist an accidental
event, and hence only to be explained by reference to external factors. (See Mill.)

53 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
The nations which are still dazzled by the sensuous glitter of precious metals, and are therefore
still fetish-worshipers of metal money, are not yet fully developed money-nations. Contrast of
France and England.
The extent to which the solution of theoretical riddles is the task of practice and effected through
practice, the extent to which true practice is the condition of a real and positive theory, is shown,
for example, in fetishism. The sensuous consciousness of the fetish-worshipper is different from
that of the Greek, because his sensuous existence is different. The abstract enmity between sense
and spirit is necessary so long as the human feeling for nature, the human sense of nature, and
therefore also the natural sense of man, are not yet produced by man’s own labor.
Equality is nothing but a translation of the German “Ich = Ich”37 into the French, i.e., political
form. Equality as the basis of communism is its political justification, and it is the same as when
the German justifies it by conceiving man as universal self-consciousness. Naturally, the
transcendence of the estrangement always proceeds from that form of the estrangement which is
the dominant power: in Germany, self-consciousness; in France, equality, because it is politics; in
England, real, material, practical need taking only itself as its standard. It is from this standpoint
that Proudhon is to be criticized and appreciated.
If we characterize communism itself because of its character as negation of the negation, as the
appropriation of the human essence through the intermediary of the negation of private property –
as being not yet the true, self-originating position but rather a position originating from private
property [...] in old-German fashion – in the way of Hegel’s phenomenology – [...] finished as a
conquered moment and […] one might be satisfied by it, in his consciousness [...] of the human
being only by real [...] transcendence of his thought now as before […], since with him therefore
the real estrangement of the life of man remains, and remains all the more, the more one is
conscious of it as such, hence it [the negation of this estrangement] can be accomplished solely
by bringing about communism.
In order to abolish the idea of private property, the idea of communism is quite sufficient. It takes
actual communist action to abolish actual private property. History will lead to it; and this
movement, which in theory we already know to be a self-transcending movement, will constitute
in actual fact a very rough and protracted process. But we must regard it as a real advance to have
at the outset gained a consciousness of the limited character as well as of the goal of this
historical movement – and a consciousness which reaches out beyond it.
When communist artisans associate with one another, theory, propaganda, etc., is their first end.
But at the same time, as a result of this association, they acquire a new need – the need for society
– and what appears as a means becomes an end. In this practical process the most splendid results
are to be observed whenever French socialist workers are seen together. Such things as smoking,
drinking, eating, etc., are no longer means of contact or means that bring them together.
Company, association, and conversation, which again has society as its end, are enough for them;
the brotherhood of man is no mere phrase with them, but a fact of life, and the nobility of man
shines upon us from their work-hardened bodies.
||XX| <When political economy claims that demand and supply always balance each other, it
immediately forgets that according to its own claim (theory of population) the supply of people
always exceeds the demand, and that, therefore, in the essential result of the whole production
process – the existence of man – the disparity between demand and supply gets its most striking
expression.
The extent to which money, which appears as a means, constitutes true power and the sole end –
the extent to which in general the means which turns me into a being, which gives me possession
of the alien objective being, is an end in itself ... can be clearly seen from the fact that landed
property, wherever land is the source of life, and horse and sword, wherever these are the true
means of life, are also acknowledged as the true political powers in life. In the Middle Ages a
54 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
social estate is emancipated as soon as it is allowed to carry the sword. Amongst nomadic peoples
it is the horse which makes me a free man and a participant in the life of the community.
We have said above that man is regressing to the cave dwelling, etc. – but he is regressing to it in
an estranged, malignant form. The savage in his cave – a natural element which freely offers itself
for his use and protection – feels himself no more a stranger, or rather feels as much at home as a
fish in water. But the cellar dwelling of the poor man is a hostile element, "a dwelling which
remains an alien power and only gives itself up to him insofar as he gives up to it his own blood
and sweat" – a dwelling which he cannot regard as his own hearth – where he might at last
exclaim: "Here I am at home" – but where instead he finds himself in someone else’s house, in
the house of a stranger who always watches him and throws him out if he does not pay his rent.
He is also aware of the contrast in quality between his dwelling and a human dwelling that stands
in the other world, in the heaven of wealth.
Estrangement is manifested not only in the fact that my means of life belong to someone else, that
my desire is the inaccessible possession of another, but also in the fact that everything is itself
something different from itself – that my activity is something else and that, finally (and this
applies also to the capitalist), all is under [the sway] of inhuman power.
There is a form of inactive, extravagant wealth given over wholly to pleasure, the enjoyer of
which on the one hand behaves as a mere ephemeral individual frantically spending himself to no
purpose, and also regards the slave-labor of others (human sweat and blood) as the prey of his
cupidity. He therefore knows man himself, and hence also his own self, as a sacrificed and futile
being. With such wealth contempt of man makes its appearance, partly as arrogance and as
squandering of what can give sustenance to a hundred human lives, and partly as the infamous
illusion that his own unbridled extravagance and ceaseless, unproductive consumption is the
condition of the other’s labor and therefore of his subsistence. He regards the realization of the
essential powers of man only as the realization of his own excesses, his whims and capricious,
bizarre notions. This wealth which, on the other hand, again knows wealth as a mere means, as
something that is good for nothing but to be annihilated and which is therefore at once slave and
master, at once magnanimous and base, capricious, presumptuous, conceited, refined, cultured
and witty – this wealth has not yet experienced wealth as an utterly alien power over itself: it sees
in it, rather, only its own power, and [not] wealth but enjoyment [is its final] aim.
This [...]
38 ||XXI| and the glittering illusion about the nature of wealth, blinded by sensuous
appearances, is confronted by the working, sober, prosaic, economical industrialist who is quite
enlightened about the nature of wealth, and who, while providing a wider sphere for the other’s
self–indulgence and paying fulsome flatteries to him in his products (for his products are just so
many base compliments to the appetites of the spendthrift), knows how to appropriate for himself
in the only useful way the other’s waning power. If, therefore, industrial wealth appears at first to
be the result of extravagant, fantastic wealth, yet its motion, the motion inherent in it, ousts the
latter also in an active way. For the fall in the rate of interest is a necessary consequence and
result of industrial development. The extravagant rentier’s means therefore dwindle day by day in
inverse proportion to the increasing possibilities and pitfalls of pleasure. Consequently, he must
either consume his capital, thus ruining himself, or must become an industrial capitalist.... On the
other hand, there is a direct, constant rise in the rent of land as a result of the course of industrial
development; nevertheless, as we have already seen, there must come a time when landed
property, like every other kind of property, is bound to fall within the category of profitably selfreproducing capital39 – and this in fact results from the same industrial development. Thus the
squandering landowner, too, must either consume his capital, and thus be ruined, or himself
become the farmer of his own estate – an agricultural industrialist.
The diminution in the interest on money, which Proudhon regards as the annulling of capital and
as a tendency to socialize capital, is therefore directly rather only a symptom of the total victory
of working capital over squandering wealth – i.e., the transformation of all private property into
55 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
industrial capital. It is a total victory of private property over all those of its qualities which are
still in appearance human, and the complete subjection of the owner of private property to the
essence of private property – labor. To be sure, the industrial capitalist also takes his pleasures.
He does not by any means return to the unnatural simplicity of need; but his pleasure is only a
side-issue – recreation – something subordinated to production; at the same time it is a calculated
and, therefore, itself an economical pleasure. For he debits it to his capital’s expense account, and
what is squandered on his pleasure must therefore amount to no more than will be replaced with
profit through the reproduction of capital. Pleasure is therefore subsumed under capital, and the
pleasure-taking individual under the capital-accumulating individual, whilst formerly the contrary
was the case. The decrease in the interest rate is therefore a symptom of the annulment of capital
only inasmuch as it is a symptom of the growing domination of capital – of the estrangement
which is growing and therefore hastening to its annulment. This is indeed the only way in which
that which exists affirms its opposite.>
The quarrel between the political economists about luxury and thrift is, therefore, only the quarrel
between that political economy which has achieved clarity about the nature of wealth, and that
political economy which is still afflicted with romantic, anti-industrial memories. Neither side,
however, knows how to reduce the subject of the controversy to its simple terms, and neither
therefore can make short work of the other. |XXI||

||XXXIV| 40 Moreover, rent of land qua rent of land has been overthrown, since, contrary to the
argument of the Physiocrats which maintains that the landowner is the only true producer,
modern political economy has proved that the landowner as such is rather the only completely
unproductive rentier. According to this theory, agriculture is the business of the capitalist, who
invests his capital in it provided he can expect the usual profit. The claim of the Physiocrats – that
landed property, as the sole productive property, should alone pay state taxes and therefore should
alone approve them and participate in the affairs of state – is transformed into the opposite
position that the tax on the rent of land is the only tax on unproductive income, and is therefore
the only tax not detrimental to national production. It goes without saying that from this point of
view also the political privilege of landowners no longer follows from their position as principal
tax-payers.
Everything which Proudhon conceives as a movement of labor against capital is only the
movement of labor in the determination of capital, of industrial capital, against capital not
consumed as capital, i.e., not consumed industrially. And this movement is proceeding along its
triumphant road – the road to the victory of industrial capital. It is clear, therefore, that only when
labor is grasped as the essence of private property, can the economic process as such be analyzed
in its real concreteness.
Society, as it appears to the political economist, is civil society41 in which every individual is a
totality of needs and only ||XXXV| exists for the other person, as the other exists for him, insofar
as each becomes a means for the other. The political economist reduces everything (just as does
politics in its Rights of Man) to man, i.e., to the individual whom he strips of all determinateness
so as to class him as capitalist or worker.
The division of labor is the economic expression of the social character of labor within the
estrangement. Or, since labor is only an expression of human activity within alienation, of the
manifestation of life as the alienation of life, the division of labor, too, is therefore nothing else
but the estranged, alienated positing of human activity as a real activity of the species or as
activity of man as a species-being.
As for the essence of the division of labor – and of course the division of labor had to be
conceived as a major driving force in the production of wealth as soon as labor was recognized as
56 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
the essence of private property – i.e., as for the estranged and alienated form of human activity as
an activity of the species – the political economists are very vague and self-contradictory about it.
Adam Smith: “This division of labor [...] is not originally the effect of any human
wisdom [...]. It is the necessary, [...] slow and gradual consequence of [...] the
propensity to truck, barter, and exchange one thing for another. [...] This
propensity” to trade is probably a “necessary consequence of the use of reason and
of speech [...]. It is common to all men, and to be found in no other race of
animals.” The animal, when it is grown up, is entirely independent. “Man has
almost constant occasion for the help of others, and it is in vain for him to expect
it from their benevolence only. He will be more likely to prevail if he can appeal
to their personal interest, and show them that it is for their own advantage to do
for him what he requires of them. [...] We address ourselves, not to their humanity
but to their self-love, and never talk to them of our own necessities but of their
advantages. [...]
“As it is by treaty, by barter, and by purchase that we obtain from one another the
greater part of those mutual good offices which we stand in need of, so it is this
same trucking disposition which originally gives occasion to the division of labor.
In a tribe of hunters or shepherds a particular person makes bows and arrows, for
example, with more readiness and dexterity than any other. He frequently
exchanges them for cattle or for venison with his companions; and he finds at last
that he can in this manner get more cattle and venison than if he himself went to
the field to catch them. From a regard to his own interest, therefore, the making of
bows, etc., grows to be his chief business [...]
“The difference of natural talents in different men […] is not [...] so much the
cause as the effect of the division of labor.... Without the disposition to truck [...]
and exchange, every man must have procured to himself every necessary and
conveniency of life [....] All must have had [...] the same work to do, and there
could have been no such difference of employment as could alone give occasion to
any great difference of talents.
“As it is this disposition which forms that difference of talents among men so it is
this same disposition which renders that difference useful. Many tribes of animals
[... ] of the same species derive from nature a much more remarkable distinction
of genius, than what, antecedent to custom and education, appears to take place
among men. By nature a philosopher is not in talent and in intelligence half so
different from a street porter, as a mastiff is from a greyhound, or a greyhound
from a spaniel, or this last from a shepherd’s dog. Those different tribes of
animals, however, though all of the same species, are of scarce any use to one
another. The mastiff cannot add to the advantages of his strength ||XXXVI| by
making use of the swiftness of the greyhound, etc. The effects of these different
talents or grades of intelligence, for want of the power or disposition to barter and
exchange, cannot be brought into a common stock, and do not in the least
contribute to the better accommodation and conveniency of the species. Each
animal is still obliged to support and defend itself, separately and independently,
and derives no sort of advantage from that variety of talents with which nature has
distinguished its fellows. Among men, on the contrary, the most dissimilar
geniuses are of use to one another; the different produces of their respective
talents, by the general disposition to truck, barter, and exchange, being brought, as
it were, into a common stock, where every man may purchase whatever part of the
produce of other men’s industry he has occasion for. [...]
57 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
“As it is the power of exchanging that gives occasion to the division of labor, so
the extent of this division must always be limited by the extent of that power, or, in
other words, by the extent of the market. When the market is very small, no person
can have any encouragement to dedicate himself entirely to one employment, for
want of the power to exchange all that surplus part of the produce of his own
labor, which is over and above his own consumption, for such parts of the produce
of other men’s labor as he has occasion for ...”
In an advanced state of society “every man thus lives by exchanging and becomes
in some measure a merchant, and the society itself grows to be what is properly a
commercial society.” (See Destutt de Tracy [, Élémens d’idéologie, Paris, 1826,
pp. 68 and 78]: “Society is a series of reciprocal exchanges; commerce contains
the whole essence of society.”) ... The accumulation of capitals mounts with the
division of labor, and vice versa.”
So much for Adam Smith.
“If every family produced all that it consumed, society could keep going although
no exchange of any sort took place; without being fundamental, exchange is
indispensable in our advanced state of society. The division of labor is a skillful
deployment of man’s powers; it increases society’s production – its power and its
pleasures – but it curtails, reduces the ability of every person taken individually.
Production cannot take place without exchange.”
Thus J. B. Say.
“The powers inherent in man are his intelligence and his physical capacity for
work. Those which arise from the condition of society consist of the capacity to
divide up labor and to distribute different jobs amongst different people ... and the
power to exchange mutual services and the products which constitute these means.
The motive which impels a man to give his services to another is self- interest – he
requires a reward for the services rendered. The right of exclusive private property
is indispensable to the establishment of exchange amongst men.” “Exchange and
division of labor reciprocally condition each other.”
Thus Skarbek.
Mill presents developed exchange – trade – as a consequence of the division of labor.
“The agency of man can be traced to very simple elements. He can, in fact, do
nothing more than produce motion. He can move things towards one another, and
he can separate them from one another: ||XXXVII| the properties of matter
perform all the rest.” “In the employment of labor and machinery, it is often found
that the effects can be increased by skillful distribution, by separating all those
operations which have any tendency to impede one another, and by bringing
together all those operations which can be made in any way to aid one another. As
men in general cannot perform many different operations with the same quickness
and dexterity with which they can by practice learn to perform a few, it is always
an advantage to limit as much as possible the number of operations imposed upon
each. For dividing labor, and distributing the powers of men and machinery, to the
greatest advantage, it is in most cases necessary to operate upon a large scale; in
other words, to produce the commodities in greater masses. It is this advantage
which gives existence to the great manufactories; a few of which, placed in the
most convenient situations, frequently supply not one country, but many
countries, with as much as they desire of the commodity produced.”
Thus Mill.
58 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
The whole of modern political economy agrees, however, that division of labor and wealth of
production, division of labor and accumulation of capital, mutually determine each other; just as
it agrees that only private property which is at liberty to follow its own course can produce the
most useful and comprehensive division of labor.
Adam Smith’s argument can be summarized as follows: Division of labor bestows on labor
infinite productive capacity. It stems from the propensity to exchange and barter, a specifically
human propensity which is probably not accidental, but is conditioned by the use of reason and
speech. The motive of those who engage in exchange is not humanity but egoism. The diversity of
human talents is more the effect than the cause of the division of labor, i.e., of exchange. Besides,
it is only the latter which makes such diversity useful. The particular attributes of the different
breeds within a species of animal are by nature much more marked than the degrees of difference
in human aptitude and activity. But because animals are unable to engage in exchange, no
individual animal benefits from the difference in the attributes of animals of the same species but
of different breeds. Animals are unable to combine the different attributes of their species, and are
unable to contribute anything to the common advantage and comfort of the species. It is otherwise
with men, amongst whom the most dissimilar talents and forms of activity are of use to one
another, because they can bring their different products together into a common stock, from
which each can purchase. As the division of labor springs from the propensity to exchange, so it
grows and is limited by the extent of exchange – by the extent of the market. In advanced
conditions, every man is a merchant, and society is a commercial society.
Say regards exchange as accidental and not fundamental. Society could exist without it. It
becomes indispensable in the advanced state of society. Yet production cannot take place without
it. Division of labor is a convenient, useful means – a skillful deployment of human powers for
social wealth; but it reduces the ability of each person taken individually. The last remark is a step
forward on the part of Say.
Skarbek distinguishes the individual powers inherent in man – intelligence and the physical
capacity for work – from the powers derived from society – exchange and division of labor,
which mutually condition one another. But the necessary premise of exchange is private property.
Skarbek here expresses in an objective form what Smith, Say, Ricardo, etc., say when they
designate egoism and self-interest as the basis of exchange, and buying and selling as the
essential and adequate form of exchange.
Mill presents trade as the consequence of the division of labor. With him human activity is
reduced to mechanical motion. Division of labor and use of machinery promote wealth of
production. Each person must be entrusted with as small a sphere of operations as possible.
Division of labor and use of machinery, in their turn, imply large-scale production of wealth, and
hence of products. This is the reason for large manufactories.
||XXXVIII| The examination of division of labor and exchange is of extreme interest, because
these are perceptibly alienated expressions of human activity and essential power as a speciesactivity and -power.
To assert that division of labor and exchange rest on private property is nothing but asserting that
labor is the essence of private property – an assertion which the political economist cannot prove
and which we wish to prove for him. Precisely in the fact that division of labor and exchange are
aspects of private property lies the twofold proof, on the one hand that human life required
private property for its realization, and on the other hand that it now requires the supersession of
private property.
Division of labor and exchange are the two phenomena which lead the political economist to
boast of the social character of his science, while in the same breath he gives unconscious
expression to the contradiction in his science – the motivation of society by unsocial, particular
interests.
59 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
The factors we have to consider are: Firstly, the propensity to exchange – the basis of which is
found in egoism – is regarded as the cause or reciprocal effect of the division of labor. Say
regards exchange as not fundamental to the nature of society. Wealth – production – is explained
by division of labor and exchange. The impoverishment of individual activity, and its loss of
character as a result of the division of labor, are admitted. Exchange and division of labor are
acknowledged as the sources of the great diversity of human talents – a diversity which in its turn
becomes useful as a result of exchange. Skarbek divides man’s essential powers of production –
or productive powers – into two parts: (1) those which are individual and inherent in him – his
intelligence and his special disposition, or capacity, for work; and (2) those derived from society
and not from the actual individual – division of labor and exchange.
Furthermore, the division of labor is limited by the market. Human labor is simple mechanical
motion: the main work is done by the material properties of the objects. The fewest possible
operations must be apportioned to any one individual. Splitting-up of labor and concentration of
capital; the insignificance of individual production and the production of wealth in large
quantities. Meaning of free private property within the division of labor. |XXXVIII||
[The Power of Money in Bourgeois Society]
 ||XL| 42 If man’s feelings, passions, etc., are not merely anthropological phenomena in the
[narrower] [This word cannot be clearly deciphered in the manuscript. – Ed.] sense, but truly
ontological43 affirmation of being (of nature), and if they are only really affirmed because their
object exists for them as a sensual object, then it is clear that:
1. They have by no means merely one mode of affirmation, but rather that the distinct character
of their existence, of their life, is constituted by the distinct mode of their affirmation. In what
manner the object exists for them, is the characteristic mode of their gratification.
2. Wherever the sensuous affirmation is the direct annulment of the object in its independent form
(as in eating, drinking, working up of the object, etc.), this is the affirmation of the object.
3. Insofar as man, and hence also his feeling, etc., is human, the affirmation of the object by
another is likewise his own gratification.
4. Only through developed industry – i.e., through the medium of private property – does the
ontological essence of human passion come into being, in its totality as well as in its humanity;
the science of man is therefore itself a product of man’s own practical activity.
5. The meaning of private property – apart from its estrangement – is the existence of essential
objects for man, both as objects of enjoyment and as objects of activity.
By possessing the property of buying everything, by possessing the property of appropriating all
objects, money is thus the object of eminent possession. The universality of its property is the
omnipotence of its being. It is therefore regarded as an omnipotent being. Money is the procurer
between man’s need and the object, between his life and his means of life. But that which
mediates my life for me, also mediates the existence of other people for me. For me it is the other
person.
“What, man! confound it, hands and feet
And head and backside, all are yours!
And what we take while life is sweet,
Is that to be declared not ours?
Six stallions, say, I can afford,
Is not their strength my property?
I tear along, a sporting lord,
As if their legs belonged to me.”
Goethe: Faust (Mephistopheles)
60 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
Shakespeare in Timon of Athens:
“Gold? Yellow, glittering, precious gold? No, Gods,
I am no idle votarist! ... Thus much of this will
make black white, foul fair,
Wrong right, base noble, old young, coward valiant.
... Why, this
Will lug your priests and servants from your sides,
Pluck stout men’s pillows from below their heads:
This yellow slave
Will knit and break religions, bless the accursed;
Make the hoar leprosy adored, place thieves
And give them title, knee and approbation
With senators on the bench: This is it
That makes the wappen’d widow wed again;
She, whom the spital-house and ulcerous sores
Would cast the gorge at, this embalms and spices
To the April day again. Come, damned earth,
Thou common whore of mankind, that putt’s odds
Among the rout of nations.”
And also later:
“O thou sweet king-killer, and dear divorce
Twixt natural son and sire! thou bright defiler
Of Hymen’s purest bed! thou valiant Mars!
Thou ever young, fresh, loved and delicate wooer,
Whose blush doth thaw the consecrated snow
That lies on Dian’s lap! Thou visible God!
That solder’s close impossibilities,
And makest them kiss! That speak’st with every tongue,
||XLII| To every purpose! O thou touch of hearts!
Think, thy slave man rebels, and by thy virtue
Set them into confounding odds, that beasts
May have the world in empire!”
Shakespeare excellently depicts the real nature of money. To understand him, let us begin, first of
all, by expounding the passage from Goethe.
That which is for me through the medium of money – that for which I can pay (i.e., which money
can buy) – that am I myself, the possessor of the money. The extent of the power of money is the
extent of my power. Money’s properties are my – the possessor’s – properties and essential
powers. Thus, what I am and am capable of is by no means determined by my individuality. I am
ugly, but I can buy for myself the most beautiful of women. Therefore I am not ugly, for the
effect of ugliness – its deterrent power – is nullified by money. I, according to my individual
characteristics, am lame, but money furnishes me with twenty-four feet. Therefore I am not lame.
I am bad, dishonest, unscrupulous, stupid; but money is honored, and hence its possessor. Money
is the supreme good, therefore its possessor is good. Money, besides, saves me the trouble of
being dishonest: I am therefore presumed honest. I am brainless, but money is the real brain of
all things and how then should its possessor be brainless? Besides, he can buy clever people for
himself, and is he who has [In the manuscript: “is”. – Ed.] power over the clever not more clever
than the clever? Do not I, who thanks to money am capable of all that the human heart longs for,
possess all human capacities? Does not my money, therefore, transform all my incapacities into
their contrary?
61 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
If money is the bond binding me to human life, binding society to me, connecting me with nature
and man, is not money the bond of all bonds? Can it not dissolve and bind all ties? Is it not,
therefore, also the universal agent of separation? It is the coin that really separates as well as the
real binding agent – the [...] [In the manuscript one word cannot be deciphered. – Ed.] chemical
power of society.
Shakespeare stresses especially two properties of money:
1. It is the visible divinity – the transformation of all human and natural properties into their
contraries, the universal confounding and distorting of things: impossibilities are soldered
together by it.
2. It is the common whore, the common procurer of people and nations.
The distorting and confounding of all human and natural qualities, the fraternization of
impossibilities – the divine power of money – lies in its character as men’s estranged, alienating
and self-disposing species-nature. Money is the alienated ability of mankind.
That which I am unable to do as a man, and of which therefore all my individual essential powers
are incapable, I am able to do by means of money. Money thus turns each of these powers into
something which in itself it is not – turns it, that is, into its contrary.
If I long for a particular dish or want to take the mail-coach because I am not strong enough to go
by foot, money fetches me the dish and the mail-coach: that is, it converts my wishes from
something in the realm of imagination, translates them from their meditated, imagined or desired
existence into their sensuous, actual existence – from imagination to life, from imagined being
into real being. In effecting this mediation, [money] is the truly creative power.
No doubt the demand also exists for him who has no money, but his demand is a mere thing of
the imagination without effect or existence for me, for a third party, for the [others], ||XLIII| and
which therefore remains even for me unreal and objectless. The difference between effective
demand based on money and ineffective demand based on my need, my passion, my wish, etc., is
the difference between being and thinking, between the idea which exists within me merely as an
idea and the idea which exists as a real object outside of me.
If I have no money for travel, I have no need – that is, no real and realizable need – to travel. If I
have the vocation for study but no money for it, I have no vocation for study – that is, no
effective, no true vocation. On the other hand, if I have really no vocation for study but have the
will and the money for it, I have an effective vocation for it. Money as the external, universal
medium and faculty (not springing from man as man or from human society as society) for
turning an image into reality and reality into a mere image, transforms the real essential powers
of man and nature into what are merely abstract notions and therefore imperfections and
tormenting chimeras, just as it transforms real imperfections and chimeras – essential powers
which are really impotent, which exist only in the imagination of the individual – into real
powers and faculties. In the light of this characteristic alone, money is thus the general distorting
of individualities which turns them into their opposite and confers contradictory attributes upon
their attributes.
Money, then, appears as this distorting power both against the individual and against the bonds of
society, etc., which claim to be entities in themselves. It transforms fidelity into infidelity, love
into hate, hate into love, virtue into vice, vice into virtue, servant into master, master into servant,
idiocy into intelligence, and intelligence into idiocy.
Since money, as the existing and active concept of value, confounds and confuses all things, it is
the general confounding and confusing of all things – the world upside-down – the confounding
and confusing of all natural and human qualities.
He who can buy bravery is brave, though he be a coward. As money is not exchanged for any one
specific quality, for any one specific thing, or for any particular human essential power, but for
62 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Third Manuscript
the entire objective world of man and nature, from the standpoint of its possessor it therefore
serves to exchange every quality for every other, even contradictory, quality and object: it is the
fraternization of impossibilities. It makes contradictions embrace.
Assume man to be man and his relationship to the world to be a human one: then you can
exchange love only for love, trust for trust, etc. If you want to enjoy art, you must be an
artistically cultivated person; if you want to exercise influence over other people, you must be a
person with a stimulating and encouraging effect on other people. Every one of your relations to
man and to nature must be a specific expression, corresponding to the object of your will, of your
real individual life. If you love without evoking love in return – that is, if your loving as loving
does not produce reciprocal love; if through a living expression of yourself as a loving person you
do not make yourself a beloved one, then your love is impotent – a misfortune. |XLIII||
[Critique of the Hegelian Dialectic and Philosophy as a Whole]
||XI| (6) This is perhaps the place at which, by way of explanation and justification, we might
offer some considerations in regard to the Hegelian dialectic generally and especially its
exposition in the Phänomenologie and Logik and also, lastly, the relation [to it] of the modern
critical movement.44
So powerful was modern German criticism’s preoccupation with the past – so completely was its
development entangled with the subject-matter – that here prevailed a completely uncritical
attitude to the method of criticizing, together with a complete lack of awareness about the
apparently formal, but really vital question: how do we now stand as regards the Hegelian
dialectic? This lack of awareness about the relationship of modern criticism to the Hegelian
philosophy as a whole and especially to the Hegelian dialectic has been so great that critics like
Strauss and Bruno Bauer still remain within the confines of the Hegelian logic; the former
completely so and the latter at least implicitly so in his Synoptiker (where, in opposition to
Strauss, he replaces the substance of “abstract nature” by the “self-consciousness” of abstract
man), and even in Das entdeckte Christenthum. Thus in Das entdeckte Christenthum, for
example, you get:
“As though in positing the world, self-consciousness does not posit that which is
different [from itself] and in what it is creating it does not create itself, since it in
turn annuls the difference between what it has created and itself, since it itself has
being only in creating and in the movement – as though its purpose were not this
movement?” etc.; or again: “They” (the French materialists) “have not yet been
able to see that it is only as the movement of self-consciousness that the
movement of the universe has actually come to be for itself, and achieved unity
with itself.” [Pp. 113, 114-15.]
Such expressions do not even show any verbal divergence from the Hegelian approach, but on the
contrary repeat it word for word.
||XII| How little consciousness there was in relation to the Hegelian dialectic during the act of
criticism (Bauer, the Synoptiker), and how little this consciousness came into being even after the
act of material criticism, is proved by Bauer when, in his Die gute Sache der Freiheit, he
dismisses the brash question put by Herr Gruppe – “What about logic now?” – by referring him to
future critics.45
But even now – now that Feuerbach both in his Thesen in the Anekdota and, in detail, in the
Philosophie der Zukunft has in principle overthrown the old dialectic and philosophy; now that
that school of criticism, on the other hand, which was incapable of accomplishing this, has all the
same seen it accomplished and has proclaimed itself pure, resolute, absolute criticism that has
come into the clear with itself; now that this criticism, in its spiritual pride, has reduced the whole
process of history to the relation between the rest of the world and itself (the rest of the world, in
contrast to itself, falling under the category of “the masses”) and dissolved all dogmatic antitheses
into the single dogmatic antithesis of its own cleverness and the stupidity of the world – the
antithesis of the critical Christ and Mankind, the “rabble”; now that daily and hourly it has
demonstrated its own excellence against the dullness of the masses; now, finally, that it has
proclaimed the critical Last Judgment in the shape of an announcement that the day is
approaching when the whole of decadent humanity will assemble before it and be sorted by it into
groups, each particular mob receiving its testimonium paupertatis; now that it has made known in
print its superiority to human feelings as well as its superiority to the world, over which it sits
enthroned in sublime solitude, only letting fall from time to time from its sarcastic lips the ringing
laughter of the Olympian Gods – even now, after all these delightful antics of idealism (i.e., of
Young Hegelianism) expiring in the guise of criticism – even now it has not expressed the

64 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy
suspicion that the time was ripe for a critical settling of accounts with the mother of Young
Hegelianism – the Hegelian dialectic – and even had nothing to say about its critical attitude
towards the Feuerbachian dialectic. This shows a completely uncritical attitude to itself.
Feuerbach is the only one who has a serious, critical attitude to the Hegelian dialectic and who
has made genuine discoveries in this field. He is in fact the true conqueror of the old philosophy.
The extent of his achievement, and the unpretentious simplicity with which he, Feuerbach, gives
it to the world, stand in striking contrast to the opposite attitude (of the others).
Feuerbach’s great achievement is:
(1) The proof that philosophy is nothing else but religion rendered into thought and expounded by
thought, i.e., another form and manner of existence of the estrangement of the essence of man;
hence equally to be condemned;
(2) The establishment of true materialism and of real science, by making the social relationship
of “man to man” the basic principle of the theory;
(3) His opposing to the negation of the negation, which claims to be the absolute positive, the
self-supporting positive, positively based on itself.
Feuerbach explains the Hegelian dialectic (and thereby justifies starting out from the positive
facts which we know by the senses) as follows:
Hegel sets out from the estrangement of substance (in logic, from the infinite, abstractly
universal) – from the absolute and fixed abstraction; which means, put popularly, that he sets out
from religion and theology.
Secondly, he annuls the infinite, and posits the actual, sensuous, real, finite, particular
(philosophy, annulment of religion and theology).
Thirdly, he again annuls the positive and restores the abstraction, the infinite – restoration of
religion and theology.
Feuerbach thus conceives the negation of the negation only as a contradiction of philosophy with
itself – as the philosophy which affirms theology (the transcendent, etc.) after having denied it,
and which it therefore affirms in opposition to itself.
The positive position or self-affirmation and self-confirmation contained in the negation of the
negation is taken to be a position which is not yet sure of itself, which is therefore burdened with
its opposite, which is doubtful of itself and therefore in need of proof, and which, therefore, is not
a position demonstrating itself by its existence – not an acknowledged ||XIII| position; hence it is
directly and immediately confronted by the position of sense-certainty based on itself. [Feuerbach
also defines the negation of the negation, the definite concept, as thinking surpassing itself in
thinking and as thinking wanting to be directly awareness, nature, reality. – Note by Marx46]
But because Hegel has conceived the negation of the negation, from the point of view of the
positive relation inherent in it, as the true and only positive, and from the point of view of the
negative relation inherent in it as the only true act and spontaneous activity of all being, he has
only found the abstract, logical, speculative expression for the movement of history, which is not
yet the real history of man as a given subject, but only the act of creation, the history of the origin
of man.
We shall explain both the abstract form of this process and the difference between this process as
it is in Hegel in contrast to modern criticism, in contrast to the same process in Feuerbach’s
Wesen des Christenthums, or rather the critical form of this in Hegel still uncritical process.

Let us take a look at the Hegelian system. One must begin with Hegel’s Phänomenologie, the true
point of origin and the secret of the Hegelian philosophy.
65 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy
Phenomenology.
A. Self-consciousness.
I. Consciousness. (α) Certainty at the level of sense-experience; or the “this” and
meaning. (ß) Perception, or the thing with its properties, and deception. (γ) Force
and understanding, appearance and the supersensible world.
II. Self-consciousness. The truth of certainty of self. (a) Independence and
dependence of self-consciousness; mastery and servitude. (b) Freedom of selfconsciousness. Stoicism, skepticism, the unhappy consciousness.
III. Reason. Reason’s certainty and reason’s truth. (a) Observation as a process of
reason. Observation of nature and of self-consciousness. (b) Realization of
rational self-consciousness through its own activity. Pleasure and necessity. The
law of the heart and the insanity of self-conceit. Virtue and the course of the
world. (c) The individuality which is real in and for itself. The spiritual animal
kingdom and the deception or the real fact. Reason as lawgiver. Reason which
tests laws.
B. Mind.
I. True mind, ethics. II. Mind in self-estrangement, culture. III. Mind certain of
itself, morality.
C. Religion. Natural religion; religion of art; revealed religion.
D. Absolute knowledge.
Hegel’s Encyklopädie, beginning as it does with logic, with pure speculative thought, and ending
with absolute knowledge – with the self-conscious, self-comprehending philosophic or absolute
(i.e., superhuman) abstract mind – is in its entirety nothing but the display, the selfobjectification, of the essence of the philosophic mind, and the philosophic mind is nothing but
the estranged mind of the world thinking within its self-estrangement – i.e., comprehending itself
abstractly.
Logic – mind’s coin of the realm, the speculative or mental value of man and nature – its essence
which has grown totally indifferent to all real determinateness, and hence unreal – is alienated
thinking, and therefore thinking which abstracts from nature and from real man: abstract
thinking.
Then: The externality of this abstract thinking ... nature, as it is for this abstract thinking. Nature
is external to it – its self-loss; and it apprehends nature also in an external fashion, as abstract
thought, but as alienated abstract thinking. Finally, mind, this thinking returning home to its own
point of origin – the thinking which as the anthropological, phenomenological, psychological,
ethical, artistic and religious mind is not valid for itself, until ultimately it finds itself, and affirms
itself, as absolute knowledge and hence absolute, i.e., abstract, mind, thus receiving its conscious
embodiment in the mode of existence corresponding to it. For its real mode of existence is
abstraction.
There is a double error in Hegel.
The first emerges most clearly in the Phänomenologie, the birth-place of the Hegelian
philosophy. When, for instance, wealth, state-power, etc., are understood by Hegel as entities
estranged from the human being, this only happens in their form as thoughts ... They are thoughtentities, and therefore merely an estrangement of pure, i.e., abstract, philosophical thinking. The
whole process therefore ends with absolute knowledge. It is precisely abstract thought from
which these objects are estranged and which they confront with their presumption of reality. The
philosopher – who is himself an abstract form of estranged man – takes himself as the criterion of
the estranged world. The whole history of the alienation process [Entäußerungsgeschichte] and
the whole process of the retraction of the alienation is therefore nothing but the history of the
66 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy
production of abstract (i.e., absolute) ||XVII| 47 thought – of logical, speculative thought. The
estrangement, [Entfremdung] which therefore forms the real interest of the transcendence
[Aufhebung] of this alienation [Entäußerung], is the opposition of in itself and for itself, of
consciousness and self-consciousness, of object and subject – that is to say, it is the opposition
between abstract thinking and sensuous reality or real sensuousness within thought itself. All
other oppositions and movements of these oppositions are but the semblance, the cloak, the
exoteric shape of these oppositions which alone matter, and which constitute the meaning of these
other, profane oppositions. It is not the fact that the human being objectifies himself inhumanly, in
opposition to himself, but the fact that he objectifies himself [selbst sich vergegenständlicht] in
distinction from and in opposition to abstract thinking, that constitutes the posited essence of the
estrangement [Entfremdung] and the thing to be superseded [aufzuhebende].
||XVIII| The appropriation of man’s essential powers, which have become objects – indeed, alien
objects – is thus in the first place only an appropriation occurring in consciousness, in pure
thought, i.e., in abstraction: it is the appropriation of these objects as thoughts and as movements
of thought. Consequently, despite its thoroughly negative and critical appearance and despite the
genuine criticism contained in it, which often anticipates far later development, there is already
latent in the Phänomenologie as a germ, a potentiality, a secret, the uncritical positivism and the
equally uncritical idealism of Hegel’s later works – that philosophic dissolution and restoration of
the existing empirical world.
In the second place: the vindication of the objective world for man – for example, the realization
that sensuous consciousness is not an abstractly sensuous consciousness but a humanly sensuous
consciousness, that religion, wealth, etc., are but the estranged world of human objectification, of
man’s essential powers put to work and that they are therefore but the path to the true human
world – this appropriation or the insight into this process appears in Hegel therefore in this form,
that sense, religion, state power, etc., are spiritual entities; for only mind is the true essence of
man, and the true form of mind is thinking mind, theological, speculative mind.
The human character of nature and of the nature created by history – man’s products – appears in
the form that they are products of abstract mind and as such, therefore, phases of mind – thoughtentities. The Phänomenologie is, therefore, a hidden, mystifying and still uncertain criticism; but
inasmuch as it depicts man’s estrangement, even though man appears only as mind, there lie
concealed in it all the elements of criticism, already prepared and elaborated in a manner often
rising far above the Hegelian standpoint. The “unhappy consciousness”, the “honest
consciousness”, the struggle of the “noble and base consciousness”, etc., etc. – these separate
sections contain, but still in an estranged form, the critical elements of whole spheres such as
religion, the state, civil life, etc. Just as entities, objects, appear as thought-entities, so the subject
is always consciousness or self-consciousness; or rather the object appears only as abstract
consciousness, man only as self-consciousness: the distinct forms of estrangement which make
their appearance are, therefore, only various forms of consciousness and self-consciousness. Just
as in itself abstract consciousness (the form in which the object is conceived) is merely a moment
of distinction of self-consciousness, what appears as the result of the movement is the identity of
self-consciousness with consciousness – absolute knowledge – the movement of abstract thought
no longer directed outwards but proceeding now only within its own self: that is to say, the
dialectic of pure thought is the result. |XVIII||

||XXIII| 48 The outstanding achievement of Hegel’s Phänomenologie and of its final outcome, the
dialectic of negativity as the moving and generating principle, is thus first that Hegel conceives
the self-creation of man as a process, conceives objectification as loss of the object, as alienation
and as transcendence of this alienation; that he thus grasps the essence of labor and comprehends
objective man – true, because real man – as the outcome of man’s own labor. The real, active
orientation of man to himself as a species-being, or his manifestation as a real species-being (i.e.,
67 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy
as a human being), is only possible if he really brings out all his species-powers – something
which in turn is only possible through the cooperative action of all of mankind, only as the result
of history – and treats these powers as objects: and this, to begin with, is again only possible in
the form of estrangement.
We shall now demonstrate in detail Hegel’s one-sidedness – and limitations as they are displayed
in the final chapter of the Phänomenologie, “Absolute Knowledge” – a chapter which contains
the condensed spirit of the Phänomenologie, the relationship of the Phänomenologie to
speculative dialectic, and also Hegel’s consciousness concerning both and their relationship to
one another.
Let us provisionally say just this much in advance: Hegel’s standpoint is that of modern political
economy.
49 He grasps labor as the essence of man – as man’s essence which stands the test: he
sees only the positive, not the negative side of labor. Labor is man’s coming-to-be for himself
within alienation, or as alienated man. The only labor which Hegel knows and recognizes is
abstractly mental labor. Therefore, that which constitutes the essence of philosophy – the
alienation of man who knows himself, or alienated science thinking itself - Hegel grasps as its
essence; and in contradistinction to previous philosophy he is therefore able to combine its
separate aspects, and to present his philosophy as the philosophy. What the other philosophers did
– that they grasped separate phases of nature and of human life as phases of self-consciousness,
namely, of abstract self-consciousness – is known to Hegel as the doings of philosophy. Hence his
science is absolute.
 Let us now turn to our subject.
“Absolute Knowledge”. The last chapter of the “Phänomenologie”.
The main point is that the object of consciousness is nothing else but self-consciousness, or that
the object is only objectified self-consciousness – self-consciousness as object. (Positing of man =
self-consciousness).
The issue, therefore, is to surmount the object of consciousness. Objectivity as such is regarded as
an estranged human relationship which does not correspond to the essence of man, to selfconsciousness. The reappropriation of the objective essence of man, produced within the orbit of
estrangement as something alien, therefore denotes not only the annulment of estrangement, but
of objectivity as well. Man, that is to say, is regarded as a non-objective, spiritual being.
The movement of surmounting the object of consciousness is now described by Hegel in the
following way:
The object reveals itself not merely as returning into the self – this is according to Hegel the onesided way of apprehending this movement, the grasping of only one side. Man is equated with
self. The self, however, is only the abstractly conceived man – man created by abstraction. Man
is selfish. His eye, his ear, etc., are selfish. In him every one of his essential powers has the
quality of selfhood. But it is quite false to say on that account “self-consciousness has eyes, ears,
essential powers”. Self-consciousness is rather a quality of human nature, of the human eye, etc.;
it is not human nature that is a quality of ||XXIV| self-consciousness.
The self-abstracted entity, fixed for itself, is man as abstract egoist – egoism raised in its pure
abstraction to the level of thought. (We shall return to this point later.)
For Hegel the human being – man – equals self-consciousness. All estrangement of the human
being is therefore nothing but estrangement of self-consciousness. The estrangement of selfconsciousness is not regarded as an expression – reflected in the realm of knowledge and thought
– of the real estrangement of the human being. Instead, the actual estrangement – that which
appears real – is according to its innermost, hidden nature (which is only brought to light by
philosophy) nothing but the manifestation of the estrangement of the real human essence, of selfconsciousness. The science which comprehends this is therefore called phenomenology. All
68 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy
reappropriation of the estranged objective essence appears therefore, as incorporation into selfconsciousness: The man who takes hold of his essential being is merely the self-consciousness
which takes hold of objective essences. Return of the object into the self is therefore the
reappropriation of the object.
Expressed in all its aspects, the surmounting of the object of consciousness means:
(1) That the object as such presents itself to consciousness as something vanishing.
(2) That it is the alienation of self-consciousness which posits thinghood.50
(3) That this alienation has, not merely a negative but a positive significance
(4) That it has this meaning not merely for us or intrinsically, but for self-consciousness itself.
(5) For self-consciousness, the negative of the object, or its annulling of itself, has positive
significance – or it knows this futility of the object – because of the fact that it alienates itself, for
in this alienation it posits itself as object, or, for the sake of the indivisible unity of being-foritself, posits the object as itself.
(6) On the other hand, this contains likewise the other moment, that self-consciousness has also
just as much superseded this alienation and objectivity and resumed them into itself, being thus at
home in its other-being as such.
(7) This is the movement of consciousness and this is therefore the totality of its moments.
(8) Consciousness must similarly be related to the object in the totality of its determinations and
have comprehended it in terms of each of them. This totality of its determinations makes the
object intrinsically a spiritual being; and it becomes so in truth for consciousness through the
apprehending of each one of the determinations as self, or through what was called above the
spiritual attitude to them.
51
 As to (1): That the object as such presents itself to consciousness as something vanishing – this is
the above-mentioned return of the object into the self.
As to (2): The alienation of self-consciousness posits thinghood. Because man equals selfconsciousness, his alienated, objective essence, or thinghood, equals alienated self-consciousness,
and thinghood is thus posited through this alienation (thinghood being that which is an object for
man and an object for him is really only that which is to him an essential object, therefore his
objective essence. And since it is not real man, nor therefore nature – man being human nature –
who as such is made the subject, but only the abstraction of man – self-consciousness, so
thinghood cannot be anything but alienated self-consciousness). It is only to be expected that a
living, natural being equipped and endowed with objective (i.e., material) essential powers should
have real natural objects of his essence; and that his self-alienation should lead to the positing of
a real, objective world, but within the framework of externality, and, therefore, an overwhelming
world not belonging to his own essential being. There is nothing incomprehensible or mysterious
in this. It would be mysterious, rather, if it were otherwise. But it is equally clear that a selfconsciousness by its alienation can posit only thinghood, i.e., only an abstract thing, a thing of
abstraction and not a real thing.52 It is ||XXVI| clear, further, that thinghood is therefore utterly
without any independence, any essentiality vis-à-vis self-consciousness; that on the contrary it is
a mere creature – something posited by self-consciousness. And what is posited, instead of
confirming itself, is but confirmation of the act of positing which for a moment fixes its energy as
the product, and gives it the semblance – but only for a moment – of an independent, real
substance.
Whenever real, corporeal man, man with his feet firmly on the solid ground, man exhaling and
inhaling all the forces of nature, posits his real, objective essential powers as alien objects by his
externalisation, it is not the act of positing which is the subject in this process: it is the
subjectivity of objective essential powers, whose action, therefore, must also be something
objective. An objective being acts objectively, and he would not act objectively if the objective
69 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy
did not reside in the very nature of his being. He only creates or posits objects, because he is
posited by objects – because at bottom he is nature. In the act of positing, therefore, this objective
being does not fall from his state of “pure activity” into a creating of the object; on the contrary,
his objective product only confirms his objective activity, his activity as the activity of an
objective, natural being.
Here we see how consistent naturalism or humanism is distinct from both idealism and
materialism, and constitutes at the same time the unifying truth of both. We see also how only
naturalism is capable of comprehending the action of world history.
<Man is directly a natural being. As a natural being and as a living natural being he is on the one
hand endowed with natural powers, vital powers – he is an active natural being. These forces
exist in him as tendencies and abilities – as instincts. On the other hand, as a natural, corporeal,
sensuous objective being he is a suffering, conditioned and limited creature, like animals and
plants. That is to say, the objects of his instincts exist outside him, as objects independent of him;
yet these objects are objects that he needs – essential objects, indispensable to the manifestation
and confirmation of his essential powers. To say that man is a corporeal, living, real, sensuous,
objective being full of natural vigor is to say that he has real, sensuous objects as the object of his
being or of his life, or that he can only express his life in real, sensuous objects. To be objective,
natural and sensuous, and at the same time to have object, nature and sense outside oneself, or
oneself to be object, nature and sense for a third party, is one and the same thing.>
Hunger is a natural need; it therefore needs a nature outside itself, an object outside itself, in
order to satisfy itself, to be stilled. Hunger is an acknowledged need of my body for an object
existing outside it, indispensable to its integration and to the expression of its essential being. The
sun is the object of the plant – an indispensable object to it, confirming its life – just as the plant
is an object of the sun, being an expression of the life-awakening power of the sun, of the sun’s
objective essential power.
A being which does not have its nature outside itself is not a natural being, and plays no part in
the system of nature. A being which has no object outside itself is not an objective being. A being
which is not itself an object for some third being has no being for its object; i.e., it is not
objectively related. Its being is not objective.
||XXVII| A non-objective being is a non-being.
Suppose a being which is neither an object itself, nor has an object. Such a being, in the first
place, would be the unique being: there would exist no being outside it – it would exist solitary
and alone. For as soon as there are objects outside me, as soon as I am not alone, I am another –
another reality than the object outside me. For this third object I am thus a different reality than
itself; that is, I am its object. Thus, to suppose a being which is not the object of another being is
to presuppose that no objective being exists. As soon as I have an object, this object has me for an
object. But a non-objective being is an unreal, non-sensuous thing – a product of mere thought
(i.e., of mere imagination) – an abstraction. To be sensuous, that is, to be really existing, means to
be an object of sense, to be a sensuous object, to have sensuous objects outside oneself – objects
of one’s sensuousness. To be sensuous is to suffer.
Man as an objective, sensuous being is therefore a suffering being – and because he feels that he
suffers, a passionate being. Passion is the essential power of man energetically bent on its object.
<But man is not merely a natural being: he is a human natural being. That is to say, he is a being
for himself. Therefore he is a species-being, and has to confirm and manifest himself as such both
in his being and in his knowing. Therefore, human objects are not natural objects as they
immediately present themselves, and neither is human sense as it immediately is – as it is
objectively – human sensibility, human objectivity. Neither nature objectively nor nature
subjectively is directly given in a form adequate to the human being.> And as everything natural
has to come into being, man too has his act of origin – history – which, however, is for him a
70 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy
known history, and hence as an act of origin it is a conscious self-transcending act of origin.
History is the true natural history of man (on which more later).
Thirdly, because this positing of thinghood is itself only an illusion, an act contradicting the
nature of pure activity, it has to be canceled again and thinghood denied.
Re 3, 4, 5 and 6. (3) This externalization [Entäußerung] of consciousness has not merely a
negative but a positive significance, and (4) it has this meaning not merely for us or intrinsically,
but for consciousness itself. For consciousness the negative of the object, its annulling of itself,
has positive significance – i.e., consciousness knows this nullity of the object – because it
alienates itself; for, in this alienation it knows itself as object, or, for the sake of the indivisible
unity of being-for-itself, the object as itself. (6) On the other hand, there is also this other moment
in the process, that consciousness has also just as much superseded this alienation and objectivity
and resumed them into itself, being thus at home in its other-being as such.
As we have already seen, the appropriation of what is estranged and objective, or the annulling
of objectivity in the form of estrangement (which has to advance from indifferent strangeness to
real, antagonistic estrangement), means likewise or even primarily for Hegel that it is objectivity
which is to be annulled, because it is not the determinate character of the object, but rather its
objective character that is offensive and constitutes estrangement for self-consciousness. The
object is therefore something negative, self-annulling – a nullity. This nullity of the object has not
only a negative but a positive meaning for consciousness, since this nullity of the object is
precisely the self-confirmation of the non-objectivity, of the ||XXVIII| abstraction of itself. For
consciousness itself the nullity of the object has a positive meaning because it knows this nullity,
the objective being, as its self-alienation; because it knows that it exists only as a result of its own
self-alienation....
The way in which consciousness is, and in which something is for it, is knowing. Knowing is its
sole act. Something therefore comes to be for consciousness insofar as the latter knows this
something. Knowing is its sole objective relation.
It, consciousness, then, knows the nullity of the object (i.e., knows the non-existence of the
distinction between the object and itself, the non-existence of the object for it) because it knows
the object as its self-alienation; that is, it knows itself – knows knowing as object – because the
object is only the semblance of an object, a piece of mystification, which in its essence, however,
is nothing else but knowing itself, which has confronted itself with itself and hence has
confronted itself with a nullity – a something which has no objectivity outside the knowing. Or:
knowing knows that in relating itself to an object it is only outside itself – that it only externalizes
itself; that it itself only appears to itself as an object – or that that which appears to it as an object
is only itself.
On the other hand, says Hegel, there is here at the same time this other moment, that
consciousness has just as much annulled and reabsorbed this externalisation and objectivity,
being thus at home in its other-being as such.
In this discussion all the illusions of speculation are brought together.
First of all: consciousness, self-consciousness, is at home in its other-being as such. It is therefore
– or if we here abstract from the Hegelian abstraction and put the self-consciousness of man
instead of self-consciousness – it is at home in its other being as such. This implies, for one thing,
that consciousness (knowing as knowing, thinking as thinking) pretends to be directly the other of
itself – to be the world of sense, the real world, life – thought surpassing itself in thought
(Feuerbach).53 This aspect is contained herein, inasmuch as consciousness as mere consciousness
takes offence not at estranged objectivity, but at objectivity as such.
Secondly, this implies that self-conscious man, insofar as he has recognized and superseded the
spiritual world (or his world’s spiritual, general mode of being) as self-alienation, nevertheless
again confirms it in this alienated shape and passes it off as his true mode of being – re-
71 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy
establishes it, and pretends to be at home in his other-being as such. Thus, for instance, after
superseding religion, after recognizing religion to be a product of self-alienation he yet finds
confirmation of himself in religion as religion. Here is the root of Hegel’s false positivism, or of
his merely apparent criticism: this is what Feuerbach designated as the positing, negating and reestablishing of religion or theology – but it has to be expressed in more general terms. Thus
reason is at home in unreason as unreason. The man who has recognized that he is leading an
alienated life in law, politics, etc., is leading his true human life in this alienated life as such. Selfaffirmation, self-confirmation in contradiction with itself – in contradiction both with the
knowledge of and with the essential being of the object – is thus true knowledge and life.
There can therefore no longer be any question about an act of accommodation on Hegel’s part
vis-à-vis religion, the state, etc., since this lie is the lie of his principle.
||XXIX| If I know religion as alienated human self-consciousness, then what I know in it as
religion is not my self-consciousness, but my alienated self-consciousness confirmed in it. I
therefore know my self-consciousness that belongs to itself, to its very nature, confirmed not in
religion but rather in annihilated and superseded religion.
In Hegel, therefore, the negation of the negation is not the confirmation of the true essence,
effected precisely through negation of the pseudo-essence. With him the negation of the negation
is the confirmation of the pseudo-essence, or of the self-estranged essence in its denial; or it is the
denial of this pseudo-essence as an objective being dwelling outside man and independent of him,
and its transformation into the subject.
A peculiar role, therefore, is played by the act of superseding in which denial and preservation,
i.e., affirmation, are bound together.
Thus, for example, in Hegel’s philosophy of law, civil law superseded equals morality, morality
superseded equals the family, the family superseded equals civil society, civil society superseded
equals the state, the state superseded equals world history. In the actual world civil law, morality,
the family, civil society, the state, etc., remain in existence, only they have become moments –
states of the existence and being of man – which have no validity in isolation, but dissolve and
engender one another, etc. They have become moments of motion.
In their actual existence this mobile nature of theirs is hidden. It appears and is made manifest
only in thought, in philosophy. Hence my true religious existence is my existence in the
philosophy of religion; my true political existence is my existence in the philosophy of law; my
true natural existence, existence in the philosophy of nature; my true artistic existence, existence
in the philosophy of art; my true human existence, my existence in philosophy. Likewise the true
existence of religion, the state, nature, art, is the philosophy of religion, of nature, of the state and
of art. If, however, the philosophy of religion, etc., is for me the sole true existence of religion
then, too, it is only as a philosopher of religion that I am truly religious, and so I deny real
religious sentiment and the really religious man. But at the same time I assert them, in part within
my own existence or within the alien existence which I oppose to them – for this is only their
philosophic expression – and in part I assert them in their distinct original shape, since for me
they represent merely the apparent other-being, allegories, forms of their own true existence (i.e.,
of my philosophical existence) hidden under sensuous disguises.
In just the same way, quality superseded equals quantity, quantity superseded equals measure,
measure superseded equals essence, essence superseded equals appearance, appearance
superseded equals actuality, actuality superseded equals the concept, the concept superseded
equals objectivity, objectivity superseded equals the absolute idea, the absolute idea superseded
equals nature, nature superseded equals subjective mind, subjective mind superseded equals
ethical objective mind, ethical mind superseded equals art, art superseded equals religion,
religion superseded equals absolute knowledge.
54
72 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy
On the one hand, this act of superseding is a transcending of a conceptual entity; thus, private
property as a concept is transcended in the concept of morality. And because thought imagines
itself to be directly the other of itself, to be sensuous reality – and therefore takes its own action
for sensuous, real action – this superseding in thought, which leaves its object in existence in the
real world, believes that it has really overcome it. On the other hand, because the object has now
become for it a moment of thought, thought takes it in its reality too to be self-confirmation of
itself – of self-consciousness, of abstraction.
||XXX| From the one point of view the entity which Hegel supersedes in philosophy is therefore
not real religion, the real state, or real nature, but religion itself already as an object of
knowledge, i.e., dogmatics; the same with jurisprudence, political science and natural science.
From the one point of view, therefore, he stands in opposition both to the real thing and to
immediate, unphilosophic science or the unphilosophic conceptions of this thing. He therefore
contradicts their conventional conceptions. [The conventional conception of theology,
jurisprudence, political science, natural science, etc. – Ed.]
On the other hand, the religious, etc., man can find in Hegel his final confirmation.
It is now time to formulate the positive aspects of the Hegelian dialectic within the realm of
estrangement.
(a) Supersession as an objective movement of retracting the alienation into self. This is the
insight, expressed within the estrangement, concerning the appropriation of the objective essence
through the supersession of its estrangement; it is the estranged insight into the real
objectification of man, into the real appropriation of his objective essence through the
annihilation of the estranged character of the objective world, through the supersession of the
objective world in its estranged mode of being. In the same way atheism, being the supersession
of God, is the advent of theoretic humanism, and communism, as the supersession of private
property, is the vindication of real human life as man’s possession and thus the advent of practical
humanism, or atheism is humanism mediated with itself through the supersession of religion,
whilst communism is humanism mediated with itself through the supersession of private
property. Only through the supersession of this mediation – which is itself, however, a necessary
premise – does positively self-deriving humanism, positive humanism, come into being.
But atheism and communism are no flight, no abstraction, no loss of the objective world created
by man – of man’s essential powers born to the realm of objectivity; they are not a returning in
poverty to unnatural, primitive simplicity. On the contrary, they are but the first real emergence,
the actual realization for man of man’s essence and of his essence as something real.
Thus, by grasping the positive meaning of self-referred negation (although again in estranged
fashion) Hegel grasps man’s self-estrangement, the alienation of man’s essence, man’s loss of
objectivity and his loss of realness as self-discovery, manifestation of his nature, objectification
and realization. <In short, within the sphere of abstraction, Hegel conceives labor as man’s act of
self-genesis – conceives man’s relation to himself as an alien being and the manifestation of
himself as an alien being to be the emergence of species-consciousness and species-life.>
(b) However, apart from, or rather in consequence of, the referral already described, this act
appears in Hegel:
First as a merely formal, because abstract, act, because the human being itself is taken to be only
an abstract, thinking being, conceived merely as self-consciousness. And,
Secondly, because the exposition is formal and abstract, the supersession of the alienation
becomes a confirmation of the alienation; or, for Hegel this movement of self-genesis and selfobjectification in the form of self-alienation and self-estrangement is the absolute, and hence
final, expression of human life – of life with itself as its aim, of life at peace with itself, and in
unity with its essence.
73 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy
This movement, in its abstract ||XXXI| form as dialectic, is therefore regarded as truly human life,
and because it is nevertheless an abstraction – an estrangement of human life – it is regarded as a
divine process, but as the divine process of man, a process traversed by man’s abstract, pure,
absolute essence that is distinct from himself.
Thirdly, this process must have a bearer, a subject. But the subject only comes into being as a
result. This result – the subject knowing itself as absolute self-consciousness – is therefore God,
absolute Spirit, the self-knowing and self-manifesting idea. Real man and real nature become
mere predicates – symbols of this hidden, unreal man and of this unreal nature. Subject and
predicate are therefore related to each other in absolute reversal – a mystical subject-object or a
subjectivity reaching beyond the object – the absolute subject as a process, as subject alienating
itself and returning from alienation into itself, but at the same time retracting this alienation into
itself, and the subject as this process; a pure, incessant revolving within itself.
First. Formal and abstract conception of man’s act of self-creation or self-objectification.
Hegel having posited man as equivalent to self-consciousness, the estranged object – the
estranged essential reality of man – is nothing but consciousness, the thought of estrangement
merely – estrangement’s abstract and therefore empty and unreal expression, negation. The
supersession of the alienation is therefore likewise nothing but an abstract, empty supersession of
that empty abstraction – the negation of the negation. The rich, living, sensuous, concrete activity
of self-objectification is therefore reduced to its mere abstraction, absolute negativity – an
abstraction which is again fixed as such and considered as an independent activity – as sheer
activity. Because this so-called negativity is nothing but the abstract, empty form of that real
living act, its content can in consequence be merely a formal content produced by abstraction
from all content. As a result therefore one gets general, abstract forms of abstraction pertaining to
every content and on that account indifferent to, and, consequently, valid for, all content – the
thought-forms or logical categories torn from real mind and from real nature. (We shall unfold
the logical content of absolute negativity further on.)
Hegel’s positive achievement here, in his speculative logic, is that the definite concepts, the
universal fixed thought-forms in their independence vis-à-vis nature and mind are a necessary
result of the general estrangement of the human being and therefore also of a human thought, and
that Hegel has therefore brought these together and presented them as moments of the
abstraction-process. For example, superseded being is essence, superseded essence is concept, the
concept superseded is ... absolute idea. But what, then, is the absolute idea? It supersedes its own
self again, if it does not want to traverse once more from the beginning the whole act of
abstraction, and to satisfy itself with being a totality of abstractions or the self-comprehending
abstraction. But abstraction comprehending itself as abstraction knows itself to be nothing: it
must abandon itself – abandon abstraction – and so it arrives at an entity which is its exact
opposite – at nature. Thus, the entire logic is the demonstration that abstract thought is nothing in
itself; that the absolute idea is nothing for itself; that only nature is something.
||XXXII| The absolute idea, the abstract idea, which
“considered with regard to its unity with itself is intuiting (Logic § 244), and
which (loc. cit.) “in its own absolute truth resolves to let the moment of its
particularity or of initial characterization and other-being, the immediate idea, as
its reflection, go forth freely from itself as nature” (loc. cit.),
this whole idea which behaves in such a strange and bizarre way, and which has given the
Hegelians such terrible headaches, is from beginning to end nothing else but abstraction (i.e., the
abstract thinker), which, made wise by experience and enlightened concerning its truth, resolves
under various (false and themselves still abstract) conditions to abandon itself and to replace its
self-absorption, nothingness, generality and indeterminateness by its other-being, the particular,
and the determinate; resolves to let nature, which it held hidden in itself only as an abstraction, as
74 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy
a thought-entity, go forth freely from itself; that is to say, this idea resolves to forsake abstraction
and to have a look at nature free of abstraction. The abstract idea, which without mediation
becomes intuiting, is indeed nothing else but abstract thinking that gives itself up and resolves on
intuition. This entire transition from logic to natural philosophy is nothing else but the transition –
so difficult to effect for the abstract thinker, who therefore describes it in such an adventurous
way – from abstracting to intuiting. The mystical feeling which drives the philosopher forward
from abstract thinking to intuiting is boredom – the longing for content.
(The man estranged from himself is also the thinker estranged from his essence – that is, from the
natural and human essence. His thoughts are therefore fixed mental forms dwelling outside nature
and man. Hegel has locked up all these fixed mental forms together in his logic, interpreting each
of them first as negation – that is, as an alienation of human thought – and then as negation of the
negation – that is, as a superseding of this alienation, as a real expression of human thought. But
as this still takes place within the confines of the estrangement, this negation of the negation is in
part the restoring of these fixed forms in their estrangement; in part a stopping at the last act – the
act of self-reference in alienation – as the true mode of being of these fixed mental forms; * –
[* (This means that what Hegel does is to put in place of these fixed abstractions
the act of abstraction which revolves in its own circle. We must therefore give him
the credit for having indicated the source of all these inappropriate concepts which
originally appertained to particular philosophers; for having brought them
together; and for having created the entire compass of abstraction as the object of
criticism, instead of some specific abstraction.) (Why Hegel separates thought
from the subject we shall see later; at this stage it is already clear, however, that
when man is not, his characteristic expression cannot be human either, and so
neither could thought be grasped as an expression of man as a human and natural
subject endowed with eyes, ears, etc., and living in society, in the world, and in
nature.) – Note by Marx]
– and in part, to the extent that this abstraction apprehends itself and experiences an infinite
weariness with itself, there makes its appearance in Hegel, in the form of the resolution to
recognize nature as the essential being and to go over to intuition, the abandonment of abstract
thought – the abandonment of thought revolving solely within the orbit of thought, of thought
sans eyes, sans teeth, sans ears, sans everything.)
||XXXIII| But nature too, taken abstractly, for itself – nature fixed in isolation from man – is
nothing for man. It goes without saying that the abstract thinker who has committed himself to
intuiting, intuits nature abstractly. Just as nature lay enclosed in the thinker in the form of the
absolute idea, in the form of a thought-entity – in a shape which was obscure and enigmatic even
to him – so by letting it emerge from himself he has really let emerge only this abstract nature,
only nature as a thought-entity – but now with the significance that it is the other-being of
thought, that it is real, intuited nature – nature distinguished from abstract thought. Or, to talk in
human language, the abstract thinker learns in his intuition of nature that the entities which he
thought to create from nothing, from pure abstraction – the entities he believed he was producing
in the divine dialectic as pure products of the labor of thought, for ever shuttling back and forth in
itself and never looking outward into reality – are nothing else but abstractions from
characteristics of nature. To him, therefore, the whole of nature merely repeats the logical
abstractions in a sensuous, external form. He once more resolves nature into these abstractions.
Thus, his intuition of nature is only the act of confirming his abstraction from the intuition of
nature [Let us consider for a moment Hegel’s characteristics of nature and the transition from
nature to the mind. Nature has resulted as the idea in the form of the other-being. Since the id .. ]
– is only the conscious repetition by him of the process of creating his abstraction. Thus, for
example, time equals negativity referred to itself (Hegel, Encyclopädie der philosophischen
Wissenschaften im Grundrisse, p. 238). To the superseded becoming as being there corresponds,
75 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy
in natural form, superseded movement as matter. Light is reflection-in-itself, the natural form.
Body as moon and comet is the natural form of the antithesis which according to logic is on the
one side the positive resting on itself and on the other side the negative resting on itself. The earth
is the natural form of the logical ground, as the negative unity of the antithesis, etc.
Nature as nature – that is to say, insofar as it is still sensuously distinguished from that secret
sense hidden within it – nature isolated, distinguished from these abstractions is nothing – a
nothing proving itself to be nothing – is devoid of sense, or has only the sense of being an
externality which has to be annulled.
“In the finite-teleological position is to be found the correct premise that nature
does not contain within itself the absolute purpose.” [§ 245.]
Its purpose is the confirmation of abstraction.
“Nature has shown itself to be the idea in the form of other-being. Since the idea
is in this form the negative of itself or external to itself, nature is not just relatively
external vis-à-vis this idea, but externality constitutes the form in which it exists as
nature.” [§ 247.]
Externality here is not to be understood as the world of sense which manifests itself and is
accessible to the light, to the man endowed with senses. It is to be taken here in the sense of
alienation, of a mistake, a defect, which ought not to be. For what is true is still the idea. Nature is
only the form of the idea’s other-being. And since abstract thought is the essence, that which is
external to it is by its essence something merely external. The abstract thinker recognizes at the
same time that sensuousness – externality in contrast to thought shuttling back and forth within
itself – is the essence of nature. But he expresses this contrast in such a way as to make this
externality of nature, its contrast to thought, its defect, so that inasmuch as it is distinguished
from abstraction, nature is something defective.
||XXXIV| An entity which is defective not merely for me or in my eyes but in itself – intrinsically
– has something outside itself which it lacks. That is, its essence is different from it itself. Nature
has therefore to supersede itself for the abstract thinker, for it is already posited by him as a
potentially superseded being.
“For us, mind has nature for its premise, being nature’s truth and for that reason
its absolute prius. In this truth nature has vanished, and mind has resulted as the
idea arrived at being-for-itself, the object of which, as well as the subject, is the
concept. This identity is absolute negativity, for whereas in nature the concept has
its perfect external objectivity, this its alienation has been superseded, and in this
alienation the concept has become identical with itself. But it is this identity
therefore, only in being a return out of nature.” [§ 381.]
“As the abstract idea, revelation is unmediated transition to, the coming-to-be of,
nature; as the revelation of the mind, which is free, it is the positing of nature as
the mind’s world – a positing which, being reflection, is at the same time, a
presupposing of the world as independently existing nature. Revelation in
conception is the creation of nature as the mind’s being, in which the mind
procures the affirmation and the truth of its freedom.” “The absolute is mind. This
is the highest definition of the absolute.” [§ 384.]

On the Jewish Question
The German Jews desire emancipation. What kind of emancipation do they desire? Civic, political emancipation.
Bruno Bauer replies to them: No one in Germany is politically emancipated. We ourselves are not free. How are we to free you? You Jews are egoists if you demand a special emancipation for yourselves as Jews. As Germans, you ought to work for the political emancipation of Germany, and as human beings, for the emancipation of mankind, and you should feel the particular kind of your oppression and your shame not as an exception to the rule, but on the contrary as a confirmation of the rule.
Or do the Jews demand the same status as Christian subjects of the state? In that case, they recognize that the Christian state is justified and they recognize, too, the regime of general oppression. Why should they disapprove of their special yoke if they approve of the general yoke? Why should the German be interested in the liberation of the Jew, if the Jew is not interested in the liberation of the German?
The Christian state knows only privileges. In this state, the Jew has the privilege of being a Jew. As a Jew, he has rights which the Christians do not have. Why should he want rights which he does not have, but which the Christians enjoy?
In wanting to be emancipated from the Christian state, the Jew is demanding that the Christian state should give up its religious prejudice. Does he, the Jew, give up his religious prejudice? Has he, then, the right to demand that someone else should renounce his religion?
By its very nature, the Christian state is incapable of emancipating the Jew; but, adds Bauer, by his very nature the Jew cannot be emancipated. So long as the state is Christian and the Jew is Jewish, the one is as incapable of granting emancipation as the other is of receiving it.
The Christian state can behave towards the Jew only in the way characteristic of the Christian state – that is, by granting privileges, by permitting the separation of the Jew from the other subjects, but making him feel the pressure of all the other separate spheres of society, and feel it all the more intensely because he is in religious opposition to the dominant religion. But the Jew, too, can behave towards the state only in a Jewish way – that is, by treating it as something alien to him, by counterposing his imaginary nationality to the real nationality, by counterposing his illusory law to the real law, by deeming himself justified in separating himself from mankind, by abstaining on principle from taking part in the historical movement, by putting his trust in a future which has nothing in common with the future of mankind in general, and by seeing himself as a member of the Jewish people, and the Jewish people as the chosen people.
On what grounds, then, do you Jews want emancipation? On account of your religion? It is the mortal enemy of the state religion. As citizens? In Germany, there are no citizens. As human beings? But you are no more human beings than those to whom you appeal.
Bauer has posed the question of Jewish emancipation in a new form, after giving a critical analysis of the previous formulations and solutions of the question. What, he asks, is the nature of the Jew who is to be emancipated and of the Christian state that is to emancipate him? He replies by a critique of the Jewish religion, he analyzes the religious opposition between Judaism and Christianity, he elucidates the essence of the Christian state – and he does all this audaciously, trenchantly, wittily, and with profundity, in a style of writing that is as precise as it is pithy and vigorous.
How, then, does Bauer solve the Jewish question? What is the result? The formulation of a question is its solution. The critique of the Jewish question is the answer to the Jewish question. The summary, therefore, is as follows:
We must emancipate ourselves before we can emancipate others.
The most rigid form of the opposition between the Jew and the Christian is the religious opposition. How is an opposition resolved? By making it impossible. How is religious opposition made impossible? By abolishing religion. As soon as Jew and Christian recognize that their respective religions are no more than different stages in the development of the human mind, different snake skins cast off by history, and that man is the snake who sloughed them, the relation of Jew and Christian is no longer religious but is only a critical, scientific, and human relation. Science, then, constitutes their unity. But, contradictions in science are resolved by science itself.
The German Jew, in particular, is confronted by the general absence of political emancipation and the strongly marked Christian character of the state. In Bauer’s conception, however, the Jewish question has a universal significance, independent of specifically German conditions. It is the question of the relation of religion to the state, of the contradiction between religious constraint and political emancipation. Emancipation from religion is laid down as a condition, both to the Jew who wants to be emancipated politically, and to the state which is to effect emancipation and is itself to be emancipated.

“Very well,” it is said, and the Jew himself says it, “the Jew is to become emancipated not as a Jew, not because he is a Jew, not because he possesses such an excellent, universally human principle of morality; on the contrary, the Jew will retreat behind the citizen and be a citizen, although he is a Jew and is to remain a Jew. That is to say, he is and remains a Jew, although he is a citizen and lives in universally human conditions: his Jewish and restricted nature triumphs always in the end over his human and political obligations. The prejudice remains in spite of being outstripped by general principles. But if it remains, then, on the contrary, it outstrips everything else.”

“Only sophistically, only apparently, would the Jew be able to remain a Jew in the life of the state. Hence, if he wanted to remain a Jew, the mere appearance would become the essential and would triumph; that is to say, his life in the state would be only a semblance or only a temporary exception to the essential and the rule.” (“The Capacity of Present-Day Jews and Christians to Become Free,” Einundzwanzig Bogen, pp. 57)

Let us hear, on the other hand, how Bauer presents the task of the state.

“France,” he says, “has recently shown us” (Proceedings of the Chamber of Deputies, December 26, 1840) “in the connection with the Jewish question – just as it has continually done in all other political questions – the spectacle of a life which is free, but which revokes its freedom by law, hence declaring it to be an appearance, and on the other hand contradicting its free laws by its action.” (The Jewish Question, p. 64)

“In France, universal freedom is not yet the law, the Jewish question too has not yet been solved, because legal freedom – the fact that all citizens are equal – is restricted in actual life, which is still dominated and divided by religious privileges, and this lack of freedom in actual life reacts on law and compels the latter to sanction the division of the citizens, who as such are free, into oppressed and oppressors.” (p. 65)

When, therefore, would the Jewish question be solved for France?

“The Jew, for example, would have ceased to be a Jew if he did not allow himself to be prevented by his laws from fulfilling his duty to the state and his fellow citizens, that is, for example, if on the Sabbath he attended the Chamber of Deputies and took part in the official proceedings. Every religious privilege, and therefore also the monopoly of a privileged church, would have been abolished altogether, and if some or many persons, or even the overwhelming majority, still believed themselves bound to fulfil religious duties, this fulfilment ought to be left to them as a purely private matter.” (p. 65)

“There is no longer any religion when there is no longer any privileged religion. Take from religion its exclusive power and it will no longer exist.” (p. 66)

“Just as M. Martin du Nord saw the proposal to omit mention of Sunday in the law as a motion to declare that Christianity has ceased to exist, with equal reason (and this reason is very well founded) the declaration that the law of the Sabbath is no longer binding on the Jew would be a proclamation abolishing Judaism.” (p. 71)

Bauer, therefore, demands, on the one hand, that the Jew should renounce Judaism, and that mankind in general should renounce religion, in order to achieve civic emancipation. On the other hand, he quite consistently regards the political abolition of religion as the abolition of religion as such. The state which presupposes religion is not yet a true, real state.

“Of course, the religious notion affords security to the state. But to what state? To what kind of state?” (p. 97)

At this point, the one-sided formulation of the Jewish question becomes evident.

It was by no means sufficient to investigate: Who is to emancipate? Who is to be emancipated? Criticism had to investigate a third point. It had to inquire: What kind of emancipation is in question? What conditions follow from the very nature of the emancipation that is demanded? Only the criticism of political emancipation itself would have been the conclusive criticism of the Jewish question and its real merging in the “general question of time.”

Because Bauer does not raise the question to this level, he becomes entangled in contradictions. He puts forward conditions which are not based on the nature of political emancipation itself. He raises questions which are not part of his problem, and he solves problems which leave this question unanswered. When Bauer says of the opponents of Jewish emancipation: “Their error was only that they assumed the Christian state to be the only true one and did not subject it to the same criticism that they applied to Judaism” (op. cit., p. 3), we find that his error lies in the fact that he subjects to criticism only the “Christian state,” not the “state as such,” that he does not investigate the relation of political emancipation to human emancipation and, therefore, puts forward conditions which can be explained only by uncritical confusion of political emancipation with general human emancipation. If Bauer asks the Jews: Have you, from your standpoint, the right to want political emancipation? We ask the converse question: Does the standpoint of political emancipation give the right to demand from the Jew the abolition of Judaism and from man the abolition of religion?

The Jewish question acquires a different form depending on the state in which the Jew lives. In Germany, where there is no political state, no state as such, the Jewish question is a purely theological one. The Jew finds himself in religious opposition to the state, which recognizes Christianity as its basis. This state is a theologian ex professo. Criticism here is criticism of theology, a double-edged criticism – criticism of Christian theology and of Jewish theology. Hence, we continue to operate in the sphere of theology, however much we may operate critically within it.

In France, a constitutional state, the Jewish question is a question of constitutionalism, the question of the incompleteness of political emancipation. Since the semblance of a state religion is retained here, although in a meaningless and self-contradictory formula, that of a religion of the majority, the relation of the Jew to the state retains the semblance of a religious, theological opposition.

Only in the North American states – at least, in some of them – does the Jewish question lose its theological significance and become a really secular question. Only where the political state exists in its completely developed form can the relation of the Jew, and of the religious man in general, to the political state, and therefore the relation of religion to the state, show itself in its specific character, in its purity. The criticism of this relation ceases to be theological criticism as soon as the state ceases to adopt a theological attitude toward religion, as soon as it behaves towards religion as a state – i.e., politically. Criticism, then, becomes criticism of the political state. At this point, where the question ceases to be theological, Bauer’s criticism ceases to be critical.

“In the United States there is neither a state religion nor a religion declared to be that of the majority, nor the predominance of one cult over another. The state stands aloof from all cults.” (Marie ou l’esclavage aux Etats-Unis, etc., by G. de Beaumont, Paris, 1835, p. 214)

Indeed, there are some North American states where “the constitution does not impose any religious belief or religious practice as a condition of political rights.” (op. cit., p. 225)

Nevertheless, “in the United States people do not believe that a man without religion could be an honest man.” (op. cit., p. 224)

Nevertheless, North America is pre-eminently the country of religiosity, as Beaumont, Tocqueville, and the Englishman Hamilton unanimously assure us. The North American states, however, serve us only as an example. The question is: What is the relation of complete political emancipation to religion? If we find that even in the country of complete political emancipation, religion not only exists, but displays a fresh and vigorous vitality, that is proof that the existence of religion is not in contradiction to the perfection of the state. Since, however, the existence of religion is the existence of defect, the source of this defect can only be sought in the nature of the state itself. We no longer regard religion as the cause, but only as the manifestation of secular narrowness. Therefore, we explain the religious limitations of the free citizen by their secular limitations. We do not assert that they must overcome their religious narrowness in order to get rid of their secular restrictions, we assert that they will overcome their religious narrowness once they get rid of their secular restrictions. We do not turn secular questions into theological ones. History has long enough been merged in superstition, we now merge superstition in history. The question of the relation of political emancipation to religion becomes for us the question of the relation of political emancipation to human emancipation. We criticize the religious weakness of the political state by criticizing the political state in its secular form, apart from its weaknesses as regards religion. The contradiction between the state and a particular religion, for instance Judaism, is given by us a human form as the contradiction between the state and particular secular elements; the contradiction between the state and religion in general as the contradiction between the state and its presuppositions in general.

The political emancipation of the Jew, the Christian, and, in general, of religious man, is the emancipation of the state from Judaism, from Christianity, from religion in general. In its own form, in the manner characteristic of its nature, the state as a state emancipates itself from religion by emancipating itself from the state religion – that is to say, by the state as a state not professing any religion, but, on the contrary, asserting itself as a state. The political emancipation from religion is not a religious emancipation that has been carried through to completion and is free from contradiction, because political emancipation is not a form of human emancipation which has been carried through to completion and is free from contradiction.

The limits of political emancipation are evident at once from the fact that the state can free itself from a restriction without man being really free from this restriction, that the state can be a free state [pun on word Freistaat, which also means republic] without man being a free man. Bauer himself tacitly admits this when he lays down the following condition for political emancipation:

“Every religious privilege, and therefore also the monopoly of a privileged church, would have been abolished altogether, and if some or many persons, or even the overwhelming majority, still believed themselves bound to fulfil religious duties, this fulfilment ought to be left to them as a purely private matter.” [The Jewish Question, p. 65]

It is possible, therefore, for the state to have emancipated itself from religion even if the overwhelming majority is still religious. And the overwhelming majority does not cease to be religious through being religious in private.

But, the attitude of the state, and of the republic [free state] in particular, to religion is, after all, only the attitude to religion of the men who compose the state. It follows from this that man frees himself through the medium of the state, that he frees himself politically from a limitation when, in contradiction with himself, he raises himself above this limitation in an abstract, limited, and partial way. It follows further that, by freeing himself politically, man frees himself in a roundabout way, through an intermediary, although an essential intermediary. It follows, finally, that man, even if he proclaims himself an atheist through the medium of the state – that is, if he proclaims the state to be atheist – still remains in the grip of religion, precisely because he acknowledges himself only by a roundabout route, only through an intermediary. Religion is precisely the recognition of man in a roundabout way, through an intermediary. The state is the intermediary between man and man’s freedom. Just as Christ is the intermediary to whom man transfers the burden of all his divinity, all his religious constraint, so the state is the intermediary to whom man transfers all his non-divinity and all his human unconstraint.

The political elevation of man above religion shares all the defects and all the advantages of political elevation in general. The state as a state annuls, for instance, private property, man declares by political means that private property is abolished as soon as the property qualification for the right to elect or be elected is abolished, as has occurred in many states of North America. Hamilton quite correctly interprets this fact from a political point of view as meaning:

“the masses have won a victory over the property owners and financial wealth.” [Thomas Hamilton, Men and Manners in America, 2 vols, Edinburgh, 1833, p. 146]

Is not private property abolished in idea if the non-property owner has become the legislator for the property owner? The property qualification for the suffrage is the last political form of giving recognition to private property.

Nevertheless, the political annulment of private property not only fails to abolish private property but even presupposes it. The state abolishes, in its own way, distinctions of birth, social rank, education, occupation, when it declares that birth, social rank, education, occupation, are non-political distinctions, when it proclaims, without regard to these distinction, that every member of the nation is an equal participant in national sovereignty, when it treats all elements of the real life of the nation from the standpoint of the state. Nevertheless, the state allows private property, education, occupation, to act in their way – i.e., as private property, as education, as occupation, and to exert the influence of their special nature. Far from abolishing these real distinctions, the state only exists on the presupposition of their existence; it feels itself to be a political state and asserts its universality only in opposition to these elements of its being. Hegel, therefore, defines the relation of the political state to religion quite correctly when he says:

“In order [...] that the state should come into existence as the self-knowing, moral reality of the mind, its distinction from the form of authority and faith is essential. But this distinction emerges only insofar as the ecclesiastical aspect arrives at a separation within itself. It is only in this way that the state, above the particular churches, has achieved and brought into existence universality of thought, which is the principle of its form” (Hegel’s Philosophy of Right, 1st edition, p. 346).

Of course! Only in this way, above the particular elements, does the state constitute itself as universality.

The perfect political state is, by its nature, man’s species-life, as opposed to his material life. All the preconditions of this egoistic life continue to exist in civil society outside the sphere of the state, but as qualities of civil society. Where the political state has attained its true development, man – not only in thought, in consciousness, but in reality, in life – leads a twofold life, a heavenly and an earthly life: life in the political community, in which he considers himself a communal being, and life in civil society, in which he acts as a private individual, regards other men as a means, degrades himself into a means, and becomes the plaything of alien powers. The relation of the political state to civil society is just as spiritual as the relations of heaven to earth. The political state stands in the same opposition to civil society, and it prevails over the latter in the same way as religion prevails over the narrowness of the secular world – i.e., by likewise having always to acknowledge it, to restore it, and allow itself to be dominated by it. In his most immediate reality, in civil society, man is a secular being. Here, where he regards himself as a real individual, and is so regarded by others, he is a fictitious phenomenon. In the state, on the other hand, where man is regarded as a species-being, he is the imaginary member of an illusory sovereignty, is deprived of his real individual life and endowed with an unreal universality.

Man, as the adherent of a particular religion, finds himself in conflict with his citizenship and with other men as members of the community. This conflict reduces itself to the secular division between the political state and civil society. For man as a bourgeois [i.e., as a member of civil society, “bourgeois society” in German], “life in the state” is “only a semblance or a temporary exception to the essential and the rule.” Of course, the bourgeois, like the Jew, remains only sophistically in the sphere of political life, just as the citoyen [‘citizen’ in French, i.e., the participant in political life] only sophistically remains a Jew or a bourgeois. But, this sophistry is not personal. It is the sophistry of the political state itself. The difference between the merchant and the citizen [Staatsbürger], between the day-laborer and the citizen, between the landowner and the citizen, between the merchant and the citizen, between the living individual and the citizen. The contradiction in which the religious man finds himself with the political man is the same contradiction in which the bourgeois finds himself with the citoyen, and the member of civil society with his political lion’s skin.

This secular conflict, to which the Jewish question ultimately reduces itself, the relation between the political state and its preconditions, whether these are material elements, such as private property, etc., or spiritual elements, such as culture or religion, the conflict between the general interest and private interest, the schism between the political state and civil society – these secular antitheses Bauer allows to persist, whereas he conducts a polemic against their religious expression.

“It is precisely the basis of civil society, the need that ensures the continuance of this society and guarantees its necessity, which exposes its existence to continual dangers, maintains in it an element of uncertainty, and produces that continually changing mixture of poverty and riches, of distress and prosperity, and brings about change in general.” (p. 8)

Compare the whole section: “Civil Society” (pp. 8-9), which has been drawn up along the basic lines of Hegel’s philosophy of law. Civil society, in its opposition to the political state, is recognized as necessary, because the political state is recognized as necessary.

Political emancipation is, of course, a big step forward. True, it is not the final form of human emancipation in general, but it is the final form of human emancipation within the hitherto existing world order. It goes without saying that we are speaking here of real, practical emancipation.

Man emancipates himself politically from religion by banishing it from the sphere of public law to that of private law. Religion is no longer the spirit of the state, in which man behaves – although in a limited way, in a particular form, and in a particular sphere – as a species-being, in community with other men. Religion has become the spirit of civil society, of the sphere of egoism, of bellum omnium contra omnes. It is no longer the essence of community, but the essence of difference. It has become the expression of man’s separation from his community, from himself and from other men – as it was originally. It is only the abstract avowal of specific perversity, private whimsy, and arbitrariness. The endless fragmentation of religion in North America, for example, gives it even externally the form of a purely individual affair. It has been thrust among the multitude of private interests and ejected from the community as such. But one should be under no illusion about the limits of political emancipation. The division of the human being into a public man and a private man, the displacement of religion from the state into civil society, this is not a stage of political emancipation but its completion; this emancipation, therefore, neither abolished the real religiousness of man, nor strives to do so.

The decomposition of man into Jew and citizen, Protestant and citizen, religious man and citizen, is neither a deception directed against citizenhood, nor is it a circumvention of political emancipation, it is political emancipation itself, the political method of emancipating oneself from religion. Of course, in periods when the political state as such is born violently out of civil society, when political liberation is the form in which men strive to achieve their liberation, the state can and must go as far as the abolition of religion, the destruction of religion. But it can do so only in the same way that it proceeds to the abolition of private property, to the maximum, to confiscation, to progressive taxation, just as it goes as far as the abolition of life, the guillotine. At times of special self-confidence, political life seeks to suppress its prerequisite, civil society and the elements composing this society, and to constitute itself as the real species-life of man, devoid of contradictions. But, it can achieve this only by coming into violent contradiction with its own conditions of life, only by declaring the revolution to be permanent, and, therefore, the political drama necessarily ends with the re-establishment of religion, private property, and all elements of civil society, just as war ends with peace.

Indeed, the perfect Christian state is not the so-called Christian state – which acknowledges Christianity as its basis, as the state religion, and, therefore, adopts an exclusive attitude towards other religions. On the contrary, the perfect Christian state is the atheistic state, the democratic state, the state which relegates religion to a place among the other elements of civil society. The state which is still theological, which still officially professes Christianity as its creed, which still does not dare to proclaim itself as a state, has, in its reality as a state, not yet succeeded in expressing the human basis – of which Christianity is the high-flown expression – in a secular, human form. The so-called Christian state is simply nothing more than a non-state, since it is not Christianity as a religion, but only the human background of the Christian religion, which can find its expression in actual human creations.

The so-called Christian state is the Christian negation of the state, but by no means the political realization of Christianity. The state which still professes Christianity in the form of religion, does not yet profess it in the form appropriate to the state, for it still has a religious attitude towards religion – that is to say, it is not the true implementation of the human basis of religion, because it still relies on the unreal, imaginary form of this human core. The so-called Christian state is the imperfect state, and the Christian religion is regarded by it as the supplementation and sanctification of its imperfection. For the Christian state, therefore, religion necessarily becomes a means; hence, it is a hypocritical state. It makes a great difference whether the complete state, because of the defect inherent in the general nature of the state, counts religion among its presuppositions, or whether the incomplete state, because of the defect inherent in its particular existence as a defective state, declares that religion is its basis. In the latter case, religion becomes imperfect politics. In the former case, the imperfection even of consummate politics becomes evident in religion. The so-called Christian state needs the Christian religion in order to complete itself as a state. The democratic state, the real state, does not need religion for its political completion. On the contrary, it can disregard religion because in it the human basis of religion is realized in a secular manner. The so-called Christian state, on the other hand, has a political attitude to religion and a religious attitude to politics. By degrading the forms of the state to mere semblance, it equally degrades religion to mere semblance.

In order to make this contradiction clearer, let us consider Bauer’s projection of the Christian state, a projection based on his observation of the Christian-German state.

“Recently,” says Bauer, “in order to prove the impossibility or non-existence of a Christian state, reference has frequently been made to those sayings in the Gospel with which the [present-day] state not only does not comply, but cannot possibly comply, if it does not want to dissolve itself completely [as a state].” “But the matter cannot be disposed of so easily. What do these Gospel sayings demand? Supernatural renunciation of self, submission to the authority of revelation, a turning-away from the state, the abolition of secular conditions. Well, the Christian state demands and accomplishes all that. It has assimilated the spirit of the Gospel, and if it does not reproduce this spirit in the same terms as the Gospel, that occurs only because it expresses this spirit in political forms, i.e., in forms which, it is true, are taken from the political system in this world, but which in the religious rebirth that they have to undergo become degraded to a mere semblance. This is a turning-away from the state while making use of political forms for its realization.” (p. 55)

Bauer then explains that the people of a Christian state is only a non-people, no longer having a will of its own, but whose true existence lies in the leader to whom it is subjected, although this leader by his origin and nature is alien to it – i.e., given by God and imposed on the people without any co-operation on its part. Bauer declares that the laws of such a people are not its own creation, but are actual revelations, that its supreme chief needs privileged intermediaries with the people in the strict sense, with the masses, and that the masses themselves are divided into a multitude of particular groupings which are formed and determined by chance, which are differentiated by their interests, their particular passions and prejudices, and obtain permission as a privilege, to isolate themselves from one another, etc. (p. 56)

However, Bauer himself says:

“Politics, if it is to be nothing but religion, ought not to be politics, just as the cleaning of saucepans, if it is to be accepted as a religious matter, ought not to be regarded as a matter of domestic economy.” (p. 108)

In the Christian-German state, however, religion is an “economic matter” just as “economic matters” belong to the sphere of religion. The domination of religion in the Christian-German state is the religion of domination.

The separation of the “spirit of the Gospel” from the “letter of the Gospel” is an irreligious act. A state which makes the Gospel speak in the language of politics – that is, in another language than that of the Holy Ghost – commits sacrilege, if not in human eyes, then in the eyes of its own religion. The state which acknowledges Christianity as its supreme criterion, and the Bible as its Charter, must be confronted with the words of Holy Scripture, for every word of Scripture is holy. This state, as well as the human rubbish on which it is based, is caught in a painful contradiction that is insoluble from the standpoint of religious consciousness when it is referred to those sayings of the Gospel with which it “not only does not comply, but cannot possibly comply, if it does not want to dissolve itself completely as a state.” And why does it not want to dissolve itself completely? The state itself cannot give an answer either to itself or to others. In its own consciousness, the official Christian state is an imperative, the realization of which is unattainable, the state can assert the reality of its existence only by lying to itself, and therefore always remains in its own eyes an object of doubt, an unreliable, problematic object. Criticism is, therefore, fully justified in forcing the state that relies on the Bible into a mental derangement in which it no longer knows whether it is an illusion or a reality, and in which the infamy of its secular aims, for which religion serves as a cloak, comes into insoluble conflict with the sincerity of its religious consciousness, for which religion appears as the aim of the world. This state can only save itself from its inner torment if it becomes the police agent of the Catholic Church. In relation to the church, which declares the secular power to be its servant, the state is powerless, the secular power which claims to be the rule of the religious spirit is powerless.

It is, indeed, estrangement which matters in the so-called Christian state, but not man. The only man who counts, the king, is a being specifically different from other men, and is, moreover, a religious being, directly linked with heaven, with God. The relationships which prevail here are still relationships dependent of faith. The religious spirit, therefore, is still not really secularized.

But, furthermore, the religious spirit cannot be really secularized, for what is it in itself but the non-secular form of a stage in the development of the human mind? The religious spirit can only be secularized insofar as the stage of development of the human mind of which it is the religious expression makes its appearance and becomes constituted in its secular form. This takes place in the democratic state. Not Christianity, but the human basis of Christianity is the basis of this state. Religion remains the ideal, non-secular consciousness of its members, because religion is the ideal form of the stage of human development achieved in this state.

The members of the political state are religious owing to the dualism between individual life and species-life, between the life of civil society and political life. They are religious because men treat the political life of the state, an area beyond their real individuality, as if it were their true life. They are religious insofar as religion here is the spirit of civil society, expressing the separation and remoteness of man from man. Political democracy is Christian since in it man, not merely one man but everyman, ranks as sovereign, as the highest being, but it is man in his uncivilized, unsocial form, man in his fortuitous existence, man just as he is, man as he has been corrupted by the whole organization of our society, who has lost himself, been alienated, and handed over to the rule of inhuman conditions and elements – in short, man who is not yet a real species-being. That which is a creation of fantasy, a dream, a postulate of Christianity, i.e., the sovereignty of man – but man as an alien being different from the real man – becomes, in democracy, tangible reality, present existence, and secular principle.

In the perfect democracy, the religious and theological consciousness itself is in its own eyes the more religious and the more theological because it is apparently without political significance, without worldly aims, the concern of a disposition that shuns the world, the expression of intellectual narrow-mindedness, the product of arbitrariness and fantasy, and because it is a life that is really of the other world. Christianity attains, here, the practical expression of its universal-religious significance in that the most diverse world outlooks are grouped alongside one another in the form of Christianity and still more because it does not require other people to profess Christianity, but only religion in general, any kind of religion (cf. Beaumont’s work quoted above). The religious consciousness revels in the wealth of religious contradictions and religious diversity.

We have, thus, shown that political emancipation from religion leaves religion in existence, although not a privileged religion. The contradiction in which the adherent of a particular religion finds himself involved in relation to his citizenship is only one aspect of the universal secular contradiction between the political state and civil society. The consummation of the Christian state is the state which acknowledges itself as a state and disregards the religion of its members. The emancipation of the state from religion is not the emancipation of the real man from religion.

Therefore, we do not say to the Jews, as Bauer does: You cannot be emancipated politically without emancipating yourselves radically from Judaism. On the contrary, we tell them: Because you can be emancipated politically without renouncing Judaism completely and incontrovertibly, political emancipation itself is not human emancipation. If you Jews want to be emancipated politically, without emancipating yourselves humanly, the half-hearted approach and contradiction is not in you alone, it is inherent in the nature and category of political emancipation. If you find yourself within the confines of this category, you share in a general confinement. Just as the state evangelizes when, although it is a state, it adopts a Christian attitude towards the Jews, so the Jew acts politically when, although a Jew, he demands civic rights.

[ * ]

But, if a man, although a Jew, can be emancipated politically and receive civic rights, can he lay claim to the so-called rights of man and receive them? Bauer denies it.

“The question is whether the Jew as such, that is, the Jew who himself admits that he is compelled by his true nature to live permanently in separation from other men, is capable of receiving the universal rights of man and of conceding them to others.”

“For the Christian world, the idea of the rights of man was only discovered in the last century. It is not innate in men; on the contrary, it is gained only in a struggle against the historical traditions in which hitherto man was brought up. Thus the rights of man are not a gift of nature, not a legacy from past history, but the reward of the struggle against the accident of birth and against the privileges which up to now have been handed down by history from generation to generation. These rights are the result of culture, and only one who has earned and deserved them can possess them.”

“Can the Jew really take possession of them? As long as he is a Jew, the restricted nature which makes him a Jew is bound to triumph over the human nature which should link him as a man with other men, and will separate him from non-Jews. He declares by this separation that the particular nature which makes him a Jew is his true, highest nature, before which human nature has to give way.”

“Similarly, the Christian as a Christian cannot grant the rights of man.” (p. 19-20)

According to Bauer, man has to sacrifice the “privilege of faith” to be able to receive the universal rights of man. Let us examine, for a moment, the so-called rights of man – to be precise, the rights of man in their authentic form, in the form which they have among those who discovered them, the North Americans and the French. These rights of man are, in part, political rights, rights which can only be exercised in community with others. Their content is participation in the community, and specifically in the political community, in the life of the state. They come within the category of political freedom, the category of civic rights, which, as we have seen, in no way presuppose the incontrovertible and positive abolition of religion – nor, therefore, of Judaism. There remains to be examined the other part of the rights of man – the droits de l’homme, insofar as these differ from the droits du citoyen.

Included among them is freedom of conscience, the right to practice any religion one chooses. The privilege of faith is expressly recognized either as a right of man or as the consequence of a right of man, that of liberty.

Déclaration des droits de l’homme et du citoyen, 1791, Article 10: “No one is to be subjected to annoyance because of his opinions, even religious opinions.” “The freedom of every man to practice the religion of which he is an adherent.”

Declaration of the Rights of Man, etc., 1793, includes among the rights of man, Article 7: “The free exercise of religion.” Indeed, in regard to man’s right to express his thoughts and opinions, to hold meetings, and to exercise his religion, it is even stated: “The necessity of proclaiming these rights presupposes either the existence or the recent memory of despotism.” Compare the Constitution of 1795, Section XIV, Article 354.

Constitution of Pennsylvania, Article 9, § 3: “All men have received from nature the imprescriptible right to worship the Almighty according to the dictates of their conscience, and no one can be legally compelled to follow, establish, or support against his will any religion or religious ministry. No human authority can, in any circumstances, intervene in a matter of conscience or control the forces of the soul.”

Constitution of New Hampshire, Article 5 and 6: “Among these natural rights some are by nature inalienable since nothing can replace them. The rights of conscience are among them.” (Beaumont, op. cit., pp. 213,214)

Incompatibility between religion and the rights of man is to such a degree absent from the concept of the rights of man that, on the contrary, a man’s right to be religious, in any way he chooses, to practise his own particular religion, is expressly included among the rights of man. The privilege of faith is a universal right of man.

The droits de l’homme, the rights of man, are, as such, distinct from the droits du citoyen, the rights of the citizen. Who is homme as distinct from citoyen? None other than the member of civil society. Why is the member of civil society called “man,” simply man; why are his rights called the rights of man? How is this fact to be explained? From the relationship between the political state and civil society, from the nature of political emancipation.

Above all, we note the fact that the so-called rights of man, the droits de l’homme as distinct from the droits du citoyen, are nothing but the rights of a member of civil society – i.e., the rights of egoistic man, of man separated from other men and from the community. Let us hear what the most radical Constitution, the Constitution of 1793, has to say:

Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.
Article 2. “These rights, etc., (the natural and imprescriptible rights) are: equality, liberty, security, property.”

What constitutes liberty?

Article 6. “Liberty is the power which man has to do everything that does not harm the rights of others,” or, according to the Declaration of the Rights of Man of 1791: “Liberty consists in being able to do everything which does not harm others.”

Liberty, therefore, is the right to do everything that harms no one else. The limits within which anyone can act without harming someone else are defined by law, just as the boundary between two fields is determined by a boundary post. It is a question of the liberty of man as an isolated monad, withdrawn into himself. Why is the Jew, according to Bauer, incapable of acquiring the rights of man?

“As long as he is a Jew, the restricted nature which makes him a Jew is bound to triumph over the human nature which should link him as a man with other men, and will separate him from non-Jews.”

But, the right of man to liberty is based not on the association of man with man, but on the separation of man from man. It is the right of this separation, the right of the restricted individual, withdrawn into himself.

The practical application of man’s right to liberty is man’s right to private property.

What constitutes man’s right to private property?

Article 16. (Constitution of 1793): “The right of property is that which every citizen has of enjoying and of disposing at his discretion of his goods and income, of the fruits of his labor and industry.”

The right of man to private property is, therefore, the right to enjoy one’s property and to dispose of it at one’s discretion (à son gré), without regard to other men, independently of society, the right of self-interest. This individual liberty and its application form the basis of civil society. It makes every man see in other men not the realization of his own freedom, but the barrier to it. But, above all, it proclaims the right of man

“of enjoying and of disposing at his discretion of his goods and income, of the fruits of his labor and industry.”

There remain the other rights of man: égalité and sûreté.

Equality, used here in its non-political sense, is nothing but the equality of the liberté described above – namely: each man is to the same extent regarded as such a self-sufficient monad. The Constitution of 1795 defines the concept of this equality, in accordance with this significance, as follows:

Article 3 (Constitution of 1795): “Equality consists in the law being the same for all, whether it protects or punishes.”

And security?

Article 8 (Constitution of 1793): “Security consists in the protection afforded by society to each of its members for the preservation of his person, his rights, and his property.”

Security is the highest social concept of civil society, the concept of police, expressing the fact that the whole of society exists only in order to guarantee to each of its members the preservation of his person, his rights, and his property. It is in this sense that Hegel calls civil society “the state of need and reason.”

The concept of security does not raise civil society above its egoism. On the contrary, security is the insurance of egoism.

None of the so-called rights of man, therefore, go beyond egoistic man, beyond man as a member of civil society – that is, an individual withdrawn into himself, into the confines of his private interests and private caprice, and separated from the community. In the rights of man, he is far from being conceived as a species-being; on the contrary, species-life itself, society, appears as a framework external to the individuals, as a restriction of their original independence. The sole bond holding them together is natural necessity, need and private interest, the preservation of their property and their egoistic selves.

It is puzzling enough that a people which is just beginning to liberate itself, to tear down all the barriers between its various sections, and to establish a political community, that such a people solemnly proclaims (Declaration of 1791) the rights of egoistic man separated from his fellow men and from the community, and that indeed it repeats this proclamation at a moment when only the most heroic devotion can save the nation, and is therefore imperatively called for, at a moment when the sacrifice of all the interest of civil society must be the order of the day, and egoism must be punished as a crime. (Declaration of the Rights of Man, etc., of 1793) This fact becomes still more puzzling when we see that the political emancipators go so far as to reduce citizenship, and the political community, to a mere means for maintaining these so-called rights of man, that, therefore, the citoyen is declared to be the servant of egotistic homme, that the sphere in which man acts as a communal being is degraded to a level below the sphere in which he acts as a partial being, and that, finally, it is not man as citoyen, but man as private individual [bourgeois] who is considered to be the essential and true man.

“The aim of all political association is the preservation of the natural and imprescriptible rights of man.” (Declaration of the Rights, etc., of 1791, Article 2)

“Government is instituted in order to guarantee man the enjoyment of his natural and imprescriptible rights.” (Declaration, etc., of 1793, Article 1)

Hence, even in moments when its enthusiasm still has the freshness of youth and is intensified to an extreme degree by the force of circumstances, political life declares itself to be a mere means, whose purpose is the life of civil society. It is true that its revolutionary practice is in flagrant contradiction with its theory. Whereas, for example, security is declared one of the rights of man, violation of the privacy of correspondence is openly declared to be the order of the day. Whereas “unlimited freedom of the press” (Constitution of 1793, Article 122) is guaranteed as a consequence of the right of man to individual liberty, freedom of the press is totally destroyed, because “freedom of the press should not be permitted when it endangers public liberty.” (“Robespierre jeune,” Historie parlementaire de la Révolution française by Buchez and Roux, vol.28, p. 159) That is to say, therefore: The right of man to liberty ceases to be a right as soon as it comes into conflict with political life, whereas in theory political life is only the guarantee of human rights, the rights of the individual, and therefore must be abandoned as soon as it comes into contradiction with its aim, with these rights of man. But, practice is merely the exception, theory is the rule. But even if one were to regard revolutionary practice as the correct presentation of the relationship, there would still remain the puzzle of why the relationship is turned upside-down in the minds of the political emancipators and the aim appears as the means, while the means appears as the aim. This optical illusion of their consciousness would still remain a puzzle, although now a psychological, a theoretical puzzle.

The puzzle is easily solved.

Political emancipation is, at the same time, the dissolution of the old society on which the state alienated from the people, the sovereign power, is based. What was the character of the old society? It can be described in one word – feudalism. The character of the old civil society was directly political – that is to say, the elements of civil life, for example, property, or the family, or the mode of labor, were raised to the level of elements of political life in the form of seigniory, estates, and corporations. In this form, they determined the relation of the individual to the state as a whole – i.e., his political relation, that is, his relation of separation and exclusion from the other components of society. For that organization of national life did not raise property or labor to the level of social elements; on the contrary, it completed their separation from the state as a whole and constituted them as discrete societies within society. Thus, the vital functions and conditions of life of civil society remained, nevertheless, political, although political in the feudal sense – that is to say, they secluded the individual from the state as a whole and they converted the particular relation of his corporation to the state as a whole into his general relation to the life of the nation, just as they converted his particular civil activity and situation into his general activity and situation. As a result of this organization, the unity of the state, and also the consciousness, will, and activity of this unity, the general power of the state, are likewise bound to appear as the particular affair of a ruler and of his servants, isolated from the people.

The political revolution which overthrew this sovereign power and raised state affairs to become affairs of the people, which constituted the political state as a matter of general concern, that is, as a real state, necessarily smashed all estates, corporations, guilds, and privileges, since they were all manifestations of the separation of the people from the community. The political revolution thereby abolished the political character of civil society. It broke up civil society into its simple component parts; on the one hand, the individuals; on the other hand, the material and spiritual elements constituting the content of the life and social position of these individuals. It set free the political spirit, which had been, as it were, split up, partitioned, and dispersed in the various blind alleys of feudal society. It gathered the dispersed parts of the political spirit, freed it from its intermixture with civil life, and established it as the sphere of the community, the general concern of the nation, ideally independent of those particular elements of civil life. A person’s distinct activity and distinct situation in life were reduced to a merely individual significance. They no longer constituted the general relation of the individual to the state as a whole. Public affairs as such, on the other hand, became the general affair of each individual, and the political function became the individual’s general function.

But, the completion of the idealism of the state was at the same time the completion of the materialism of civil society. Throwing off the political yoke meant at the same time throwing off the bonds which restrained the egoistic spirit of civil society. Political emancipation was, at the same time, the emancipation of civil society from politics, from having even the semblance of a universal content.

Feudal society was resolved into its basic element – man, but man as he really formed its basis – egoistic man.

This man, the member of civil society, is thus the basis, the precondition, of the political state. He is recognized as such by this state in the rights of man.

The liberty of egoistic man and the recognition of this liberty, however, is rather the recognition of the unrestrained movement of the spiritual and material elements which form the content of his life.

Hence, man was not freed from religion, he received religious freedom. He was not freed from property, he received freedom to own property. He was not freed from the egoism of business, he received freedom to engage in business.

The establishment of the political state and the dissolution of civil society into independent individuals – whose relation with one another epend on law, just as the relations of men in the system of estates and guilds depended on privilege – is accomplished by one and the same act. Man as a member of civil society, unpolitical man, inevitably appears, however, as the natural man. The “rights of man” appears as “natural rights,” because conscious activity is concentrated on the political act. Egoistic man is the passive result of the dissolved society, a result that is simply found in existence, an object of immediate certainty, therefore a natural object. The political revolution resolves civil life into its component parts, without revolutionizing these components themselves or subjecting them to criticism. It regards civil society, the world of needs, labor, private interests, civil law, as the basis of its existence, as a precondition not requiring further substantiation and therefore as its natural basis. Finally, man as a member of civil society is held to be man in the proper sense, homme as distinct from citoyen, because he is man in his sensuous, individual, immediate existence, whereas political man is only abstract, artificial man, man as an allegorical, juridical person. The real man is recognized only in the shape of the egoistic individual, the true man is recognized only in the shape of the abstract citizen.

Therefore, Rousseau correctly described the abstract idea of political man as follows:

“Whoever dares undertake to establish a people’s institutions must feel himself capable of changing, as it were, human nature, of transforming each individual, who by himself is a complete and solitary whole, into a part of a larger whole, from which, in a sense, the individual receives his life and his being, of substituting a limited and mental existence for the physical and independent existence. He has to take from man his own powers, and give him in exchange alien powers which he cannot employ without the help of other men.”

All emancipation is a reduction of the human world and relationships to man himself.

Political emancipation is the reduction of man, on the one hand, to a member of civil society, to an egoistic, independent individual, and, on the other hand, to a citizen, a juridical person.

Only when the real, individual man re-absorbs in himself the abstract citizen, and as an individual human being has become a species-being in his everyday life, in his particular work, and in his particular situation, only when man has recognized and organized his “own powers” as social powers, and, consequently, no longer separates social power from himself in the shape of political power, only then will human emancipation have been accomplished.

II
Bruno Bauer,
“The Capacity of Present-day Jews and Christians to Become Free,”
Einundzwanzig Bogen aus der Schweiz, pp. 56-71
It is in this form that Bauer deals with the relation between the Jewish and the Christian religions, and also with their relation to criticism. Their relation to criticism is their relation “to the capacity to become free.”

The result arrived at is:

“The Christian has to surmount only one stage, namely, that of his religion, in order to give up religion altogether,”

and therefore become free.

“The Jew, on the other hand, has to break not only with his Jewish nature, but also with the development towards perfecting his religion, a development which has remained alien to him.” (p. 71)

Thus, Bauer here transforms the question of Jewish emancipation into a purely religious question. The theological problem as to whether the Jew or the Christian has the better prospect of salvation is repeated here in the enlightened form: which of them is more capable of emancipation. No longer is the question asked: Is it Judaism or Christianity that makes a man free? On the contrary, the question is now: Which makes man freer, the negation of Judaism or the negation of Christianity?

“If the Jews want to become free, they should profess belief not in Christianity, but in the dissolution of Christianity, in the dissolution of religion in general, that is to say, in enlightenment, criticism, and its consequences, free humanity.” (p. 70)

For the Jew, it is still a matter of a profession of faith, but no longer a profession of belief in Christianity, but of belief in Christianity in dissolution.

Bauer demands of the Jews that they should break with the essence of the Christian religion, a demand which, as he says himself, does not arise out of the development of Judaism.

Since Bauer, at the end of his work on the Jewish question, had conceived Judaism only as crude religious criticism of Christianity, and therefore saw in it “merely” a religious significance, it could be foreseen that the emancipation of the Jews, too, would be transformed into a philosophical-theological act.

Bauer considers that the ideal, abstract nature of the Jew, his religion, is his entire nature. Hence, he rightly concludes:

“The Jew contributes nothing to mankind if he himself disregards his narrow law,” if he invalidates his entire Judaism. (p. 65)

Accordingly, the relation between Jews and Christians becomes the following: the sole interest of the Christian in the emancipation of the Jew is a general human interest, a theoretical interest. Judaism is a fact that offends the religious eye of the Christian. As soon as his eye ceases to be religious, this fact ceases to be offensive. The emancipation of the Jew is, in itself, not a task for the Christian.

The Jew, on the other hand, in order to emancipate himself, has to carry out not only his own work, but also that of the Christian – i.e., the Critique of the Evangelical History of the Synoptics and the Life of Jesus, etc.

“It is up to them to deal with it: they themselves will decide their fate; but history is not to be trifled with.” (p. 71)

We are trying to break with the theological formulation of the question. For us, the question of the Jew’s capacity for emancipation becomes the question: What particular social element has to be overcome in order to abolish Judaism? For the present-day Jew’s capacity for emancipation is the relation of Judaism to the emancipation of the modern world. This relation necessarily results from the special position of Judaism in the contemporary enslaved world.

Let us consider the actual, worldly Jew – not the Sabbath Jew, as Bauer does, but the everyday Jew.

Let us not look for the secret of the Jew in his religion, but let us look for the secret of his religion in the real Jew.

What is the secular basis of Judaism? Practical need, self-interest. What is the worldly religion of the Jew? Huckstering. What is his worldly God? Money.

Very well then! Emancipation from huckstering and money, consequently from practical, real Judaism, would be the self-emancipation of our time.

An organization of society which would abolish the preconditions for huckstering, and therefore the possibility of huckstering, would make the Jew impossible. His religious consciousness would be dissipated like a thin haze in the real, vital air of society. On the other hand, if the Jew recognizes that this practical nature of his is futile and works to abolish it, he extricates himself from his previous development and works for human emancipation as such and turns against the supreme practical expression of human self-estrangement.

We recognize in Judaism, therefore, a general anti-social element of the present time, an element which through historical development – to which in this harmful respect the Jews have zealously contributed – has been brought to its present high level, at which it must necessarily begin to disintegrate.

In the final analysis, the emancipation of the Jews is the emancipation of mankind from Judaism.

The Jew has already emancipated himself in a Jewish way.

“The Jew, who in Vienna, for example, is only tolerated, determines the fate of the whole Empire by his financial power. The Jew, who may have no rights in the smallest German state, decides the fate of Europe. While corporations and guilds refuse to admit Jews, or have not yet adopted a favorable attitude towards them, the audacity of industry mocks at the obstinacy of the material institutions.” (Bruno Bauer, The Jewish Question, p. 114)

This is no isolated fact. The Jew has emancipated himself in a Jewish manner, not only because he has acquired financial power, but also because, through him and also apart from him, money has become a world power and the practical Jewish spirit has become the practical spirit of the Christian nations. The Jews have emancipated themselves insofar as the Christians have become Jews.

Captain Hamilton, for example, reports:

“The devout and politically free inhabitant of New England is a kind of Laocoön who makes not the least effort to escape from the serpents which are crushing him. Mammon is his idol which he adores not only with his lips but with the whole force of his body and mind. In his view the world is no more than a Stock Exchange, and he is convinced that he has no other destiny here below than to become richer than his neighbor. Trade has seized upon all his thoughts, and he has no other recreation than to exchange objects. When he travels he carries, so to speak, his goods and his counter on his back and talks only of interest and profit. If he loses sight of his own business for an instant it is only in order to pry into the business of his competitors.”

Indeed, in North America, the practical domination of Judaism over the Christian world has achieved as its unambiguous and normal expression that the preaching of the Gospel itself and the Christian ministry have become articles of trade, and the bankrupt trader deals in the Gospel just as the Gospel preacher who has become rich goes in for business deals.

“The man who you see at the head of a respectable congregation began as a trader; his business having failed, he became a minister. The other began as a priest but as soon as he had some money at his disposal he left the pulpit to become a trader. In the eyes of very many people, the religious ministry is a veritable business career.” (Beaumont, op. cit., pp. 185,186)

According to Bauer, it is

“a fictitious state of affairs when in theory the Jew is deprived of political rights, whereas in practice he has immense power and exerts his political influence en gros, although it is curtailed en détail.” (Die Judenfrage, p. 114)

The contradiction that exists between the practical political power of the Jew and his political rights is the contradiction between politics and the power of money in general. Although theoretically the former is superior to the latter, in actual fact politics has become the serf of financial power.

Judaism has held its own alongside Christianity, not only as religious criticism of Christianity, not only as the embodiment of doubt in the religious derivation of Christianity, but equally because the practical Jewish spirit, Judaism, has maintained itself and even attained its highest development in Christian society. The Jew, who exists as a distinct member of civil society, is only a particular manifestation of the Judaism of civil society.

Judaism continues to exist not in spite of history, but owing to history.

The Jew is perpetually created by civil society from its own entrails.

What, in itself, was the basis of the Jewish religion? Practical need, egoism.

The monotheism of the Jew, therefore, is in reality the polytheism of the many needs, a polytheism which makes even the lavatory an object of divine law. Practical need, egoism, is the principle of civil society, and as such appears in pure form as soon as civil society has fully given birth to the political state. The god of practical need and self-interest is money.

Money is the jealous god of Israel, in face of which no other god may exist. Money degrades all the gods of man – and turns them into commodities. Money is the universal self-established value of all things. It has, therefore, robbed the whole world – both the world of men and nature – of its specific value. Money is the estranged essence of man’s work and man’s existence, and this alien essence dominates him, and he worships it.

The god of the Jews has become secularized and has become the god of the world. The bill of exchange is the real god of the Jew. His god is only an illusory bill of exchange.

The view of nature attained under the domination of private property and money is a real contempt for, and practical debasement of, nature; in the Jewish religion, nature exists, it is true, but it exists only in imagination.

It is in this sense that [in a 1524 pamphlet] Thomas Münzer declares it intolerable

“that all creatures have been turned into property, the fishes in the water, the birds in the air, the plants on the earth; the creatures, too, must become free.”

Contempt for theory, art, history, and for man as an end in himself, which is contained in an abstract form in the Jewish religion, is the real, conscious standpoint, the virtue of the man of money. The species-relation itself, the relation between man and woman, etc., becomes an object of trade! The woman is bought and sold.

The chimerical nationality of the Jew is the nationality of the merchant, of the man of money in general.

The groundless law of the Jew is only a religious caricature of groundless morality and right in general, of the purely formal rites with which the world of self-interest surrounds itself.

Here, too, man’s supreme relation is the legal one, his relation to laws that are valid for him not because they are laws of his own will and nature, but because they are the dominant laws and because departure from them is avenged.

Jewish Jesuitism, the same practical Jesuitism which Bauer discovers in the Talmud, is the relation of the world of self-interest to the laws governing that world, the chief art of which consists in the cunning circumvention of these laws.

Indeed, the movement of this world within its framework of laws is bound to be a continual suspension of law.

Judaism could not develop further as a religion, could not develop further theoretically, because the world outlook of practical need is essentially limited and is completed in a few strokes.

By its very nature, the religion of practical need could find its consummation not in theory, but only in practice, precisely because its truth is practice.

Judaism could not create a new world; it could only draw the new creations and conditions of the world into the sphere of its activity, because practical need, the rationale of which is self-interest, is passive and does not expand at will, but finds itself enlarged as a result of the continuous development of social conditions.

Judaism reaches its highest point with the perfection of civil society, but it is only in the Christian world that civil society attains perfection. Only under the dominance of Christianity, which makes all national, natural, moral, and theoretical conditions extrinsic to man, could civil society separate itself completely from the life of the state, sever all the species-ties of man, put egoism and selfish need in the place of these species-ties, and dissolve the human world into a world of atomistic individuals who are inimically opposed to one another.
Christianity sprang from Judaism. It has merged again in Judaism.
From the outset, the Christian was the theorizing Jew, the Jew is, therefore, the practical Christian, and the practical Christian has become a Jew again.

Christianity had only in semblance overcome real Judaism. It was too noble-minded, too spiritualistic to eliminate the crudity of practical need in any other way than by elevation to the skies.

Christianity is the sublime thought of Judaism, Judaism is the common practical application of Christianity, but this application could only become general after Christianity as a developed religion had completed theoretically the estrangement of man from himself and from nature.

Only then could Judaism achieve universal dominance and make alienated man and alienated nature into alienable, vendible objects subjected to the slavery of egoistic need and to trading.

Selling [verausserung] is the practical aspect of alienation [Entausserung]. Just as man, as long as he is in the grip of religion, is able to objectify his essential nature only by turning it into something alien, something fantastic, so under the domination of egoistic need he can be active practically, and produce objects in practice, only by putting his products, and his activity, under the domination of an alien being, and bestowing the significance of an alien entity – money – on them.

In its perfected practice, Christian egoism of heavenly bliss is necessarily transformed into the corporal egoism of the Jew, heavenly need is turned into world need, subjectivism into self-interest. We explain the tenacity of the Jew not by his religion, but, on the contrary, by the human basis of his religion – practical need, egoism.

Since in civil society the real nature of the Jew has been universally realized and secularized, civil society could not convince the Jew of the unreality of his religious nature, which is indeed only the ideal aspect of practical need. Consequently, not only in the Pentateuch and the Talmud, but in present-day society we find the nature of the modern Jew, and not as an abstract nature but as one that is in the highest degree empirical, not merely as a narrowness of the Jew, but as the Jewish narrowness of society.

Once society has succeeded in abolishing the empirical essence of Judaism – huckstering and its preconditions – the Jew will have become impossible, because his consciousness no longer has an object, because the subjective basis of Judaism, practical need, has been humanized, and because the conflict between man’s individual-sensuous existence and his species-existence has been abolished.

The social emancipation of the Jew is the emancipation of society from Judaism.
Marx’s Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right
For Germany, the criticism of religion has been essentially completed, and the criticism of religion is the
prerequisite of all criticism.
The profane existence of error is compromised as soon as its heavenly oratio pro aris et focis [“speech for
the altars and hearths”] has been refuted. Man, who has found only the reflection of himself in the
fantastic reality of heaven, where he sought a superman, will no longer feel disposed to find the mere
appearance of himself, the non-man [“Unmensch”], where he seeks and must seek his true reality.
The foundation of irreligious criticism is: Man makes religion, religion does not make man.
Religion is, indeed, the self-consciousness and self-esteem of man who has either not yet won through to
himself, or has already lost himself again. But, man is no abstract being squatting outside the world. Man
is the world of man — state, society. This state and this society produce religion, which is an inverted
consciousness of the world, because they are an inverted world. Religion is the general theory of this
world, its encyclopaedic compendium, its logic in popular form, its spiritual point d'honneur, it
enthusiasm, its moral sanction, its solemn complement, and its universal basis of consolation and
justification. It is the fantastic realization of the human essence since the human essence has not acquired
any true reality. The struggle against religion is, therefore, indirectly the struggle against that world
whose spiritual aroma is religion.
Religious suffering is, at one and the same time, the expression of real suffering and a protest against real
suffering. Religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature, the heart of a heartless world, and the soul of
soulless conditions. It is the opium of the people.
The abolition of religion as the illusory happiness of the people is the demand for their real happiness.
To call on them to give up their illusions about their condition is to call on them to give up a condition
that requires illusions. The criticism of religion is, therefore, in embryo, the criticism of that vale of tears
of which religion is the halo.
Criticism has plucked the imaginary flowers on the chain not in order that man shall continue to bear that
chain without fantasy or consolation, but so that he shall throw off the chain and pluck the living flower.
The criticism of religion disillusions man, so that he will think, act, and fashion his reality like a man
who has discarded his illusions and regained his senses, so that he will move around himself as his own
true Sun. Religion is only the illusory Sun which revolves around man as long as he does not revolve
around himself.
It is, therefore, the task of history, once the other-world of truth has vanished, to establish the truth of this
world. It is the immediate task of philosophy, which is in the service of history, to unmask
self-estrangement in its unholy forms once the holy form of human self-estrangement has been
unmasked. Thus, the criticism of Heaven turns into the criticism of Earth, the criticism of religion into
the criticism of law, and the criticism of theology into the criticism of politics.
Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/intro.htm (1 of 9) [23/08/2000 18:48:47]
The following exposition [a full-scale critical study of Hegel's Philosophy of Right was supposed to
follow this introduction] — a contribution to this undertaking — concerns itself not directly with the
original but with a copy, with the German philosophy of the state and of law. The only reason for this is
that it is concerned with Germany.
If we were to begin with the German status quo itself, the result — even if we were to do it in the only
appropriate way, i.e., negatively — would still be an anachronism. Even the negation of our present
political situation is a dusty fact in the historical junk room of modern nations. If I negate the situation in
Germany in 1843, then according to the French calendar I have barely reached 1789, much less the vital
centre of our present age.
Indeed, German history prides itself on having travelled a road which no other nation in the whole of
history has ever travelled before, or ever will again. We have shared the restorations of modern nations
without ever having shared their revolutions. We have been restored, firstly, because other nations dared
to make revolutions, and, secondly, because other nations suffered counter-revolutions; open the one
hand, because our masters were afraid, and, on the other, because they were not afraid. With our
shepherds to the fore, we only once kept company with freedom, on the day of its internment.
One school of thought that legitimizes the infamy of today with the infamy of yesterday, a school that
stigmatizes every cry of the serf against the knout as mere rebelliousness once the knout has aged a little
and acquired a hereditary significance and a history, a school to which history shows nothing but its a
posteriori, as did the God of Israel to his servant Moses, the historical school of law — this school would
have invented German history were it not itself an invention of that history. A Shylock, but a cringing
Shylock, that swears by its bond, its historical bond, its Christian-Germanic bond, for every pound of
flesh cut from the heart of the people.
Good-natured enthusiasts, Germanomaniacs by extraction and free-thinkers by reflexion, on the contrary,
seek our history of freedom beyond our history in the ancient Teutonic forests. But, what difference is
there between the history of our freedom and the history of the boar's freedom if it can be found only in
the forests? Besides, it is common knowledge that the forest echoes back what you shout into it. So peace
to the ancient Teutonic forests!
War on the German state of affairs! By all means! They are below the level of history, they are beneath
any criticism, but they are still an object of criticism like the criminal who is below the level of humanity
but still an object for the executioner. In the struggle against that state of affairs, criticism is no passion
of the head, it is the head of passion. It is not a lancet, it is a weapon. Its object is its enemy, which it
wants not to refute but to exterminate. For the spirit of that state of affairs is refuted. In itself, it is no
object worthy of thought, it is an existence which is as despicable as it is despised. Criticism does not
need to make things clear to itself as regards this object, for it has already settled accounts with it. It no
longer assumes the quality of an end-in-itself, but only of a means. Its essential pathos is indignation, its
essential work is denunciation.
It is a case of describing the dull reciprocal pressure of all social spheres one on another, a general
inactive ill-humor, a limitedness which recognizes itself as much as it mistakes itself, within the frame of
government system which, living on the preservation of all wretchedness, is itself nothing but
wretchedness in office.
What a sight! This infinitely proceeding division of society into the most manifold races opposed to one
Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/intro.htm (2 of 9) [23/08/2000 18:48:47]
another by petty antipathies, uneasy consciences, and brutal mediocrity, and which, precisely because of
their reciprocal ambiguous and distrustful attitude, are all, without exception although with various
formalities, treated by their rulers as conceded existences. And they must recognize and acknowledge as
a concession of heaven the very fact that they are mastered, ruled, possessed! And, on the other side, are
the rulers themselves, whose greatness is in inverse proportion to their number!
Criticism dealing with this content is criticism in a hand-to-hand fight, and in such a fight the point is not
whether the opponent is a noble, equal, interesting opponent, the point is to strike him. The point is not to
let the Germans have a minute for self-deception and resignation. The actual pressure must be made
more pressing by adding to it consciousness of pressure, the shame must be made more shameful by
publicizing it. Every sphere of German society must be shown as the partie honteuse of German society:
these petrified relations must be forced to dance by singing their own tune to them! The people must be
taught to be terrified at itself in order to give it courage. This will be fulfilling an imperative need of the
German nation, and the needs of the nations are in themselves the ultimate reason for their satisfaction.
This struggle against the limited content of the German status quo cannot be without interest even for the
modern nations, for the German status quo is the open completion of the ancien regime and the ancien
regime is the concealed deficiency of the modern state. The struggle against the German political present
is the struggle against the past of the modern nations, and they are still burdened with reminders of that
past. It is instructive for them to see the ancien regime, which has been through its tragedy with them,
playing its comedy as a German revenant. Tragic indeed was the pre-existing power of the world, and
freedom, on the other hand, was a personal notion; in short, as long as it believed and had to believe in its
own justification. As long as the ancien regime, as an existing world order, struggled against a world that
was only coming into being, there was on its side a historical error, not a personal one. That is why its
downfall was tragic.
On the other hand, the present German regime, an anachronism, a flagrant contradiction of generally
recognized axioms, the nothingness of the ancien regime exhibited to the world, only imagines that it
believes in itself and demands that the world should imagine the same thing. If it believed in its own
essence, would it try to hide that essence under the semblance of an alien essence and seek refuge in
hypocrisy and sophism? The modern ancien regime is rather only the comedian of a world order whose
true heroes are dead. History is thorough and goes through many phases when carrying an old form to
the grave. The last phases of a world-historical form is its comedy. The gods of Greece, already tragically
wounded to death in Aeschylus's tragedy Prometheus Bound, had to re-die a comic death in Lucian's
Dialogues. Why this course of history? So that humanity should part with its past cheerfully. This
cheerful historical destiny is what we vindicate for the political authorities of Germany.
Meanwhile, once modern politico-social reality itself is subjected to criticism, once criticism rises to
truly human problems, it finds itself outside the German status quo, or else it would reach out for its
object below its object. An example. The relation of industry, of the world of wealth generally, to the
political world is one of the major problems of modern times. In what form is this problem beginning to
engage the attention of the Germans? In the form of protective duties, of the prohibitive system, or
national economy. Germanomania has passed out of man into matter,, and thus one morning our cotton
barons and iron heroes saw themselves turned into patriots. People are, therefore, beginning in Germany
to acknowledge the sovereignty of monopoly on the inside through lending it sovereignty on the outside.
People are, therefore, now about to begin, in Germany, what people in France and England are about to
end. The old corrupt condition against which these countries are revolting in theory, and which they only
Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/intro.htm (3 of 9) [23/08/2000 18:48:47]
bear as one bears chains, is greeted in Germany as the dawn of a beautiful future which still hardly dares
to pass from crafty theory to the most ruthless practice. Whereas the problem in France and England is:
Political economy, or the rule of society over wealth; in Germany, it is: National economy, or the
mastery of private property over nationality. In France and England, then, it is a case of abolishing
monopoly that has proceeded to its last consequences; in Germany, it is a case of proceeding to the last
consequences of monopoly. There is an adequate example of the German form of modern problems, an
example of how our history, like a clumsy recruit, still has to do extra drill on things that are old and
hackneyed in history.
If, therefore, the whole German development did not exceed the German political development, a
German could at the most have the share in the problems-of-the-present that a Russian has. But, when the
separate individual is not bound by the limitations of the nation, the nation as a whole is still less
liberated by the liberation of one individual. The fact that Greece had a Scythian among its philosophers
did not help the Scythians to make a single step towards Greek culture. [An allusion to Anacharsis.]
Luckily, we Germans are not Scythians.
As the ancient peoples went through their pre-history in imagination, in mythology, so we Germans have
gone through our post-history in thought, in philosophy. We are philosophical contemporaries of the
present without being its historical contemporaries. German philosophy is the ideal prolongation of
German history. If therefore, instead of of the oeuvres incompletes of our real history, we criticize the
oeuvres posthumes of our ideal history, philosophy, our criticism is in the midst of the questions of
which the present says: that is the question. What, in progressive nations, is a practical break with
modern state conditions, is, in Germany, where even those conditions do not yet exist, at first a critical
break with the philosophical reflexion of those conditions.
German philosophy of right and state is the only German history which is al pari ["on a level"] with the
official modern present. The German nation must therefore join this, its dream-history, to its present
conditions and subject to criticism not only these existing conditions, but at the same time their abstract
continuation. Its future cannot be limited either to the immediate negation of its real conditions of state
and right, or to the immediate implementation of its ideal state and right conditions, for it has the
immediate negation of its real conditions in its ideal conditions, and it has almost outlived the immediate
implementation of its ideal conditions in the contemplation of neighboring nations.
Hence, it is with good reason that the practical political part in Germany demands the negation of
philosophy.
It is wrong, not in its demand but in stopping at the demand, which it neither seriously implements nor
can implement. It believes that it implements that negation by turning its back to philosophy and its head
away from it and muttering a few trite and angry phrases about it. Owing to the limitation of its outlook,
it does not include philosophy in the circle of German reality or it even fancies it is beneath German
practice and the theories that serve it. You demand that real life embryos be made the starting-point, but
you forget that the real life embryo of the German nation has grown so far only inside its cranium. In a
word — You cannot abolish philosophy without making it a reality.
The same mistake, but with the factors reversed, was made by the theoretical party originating from
philosophy.
In the present struggle it saw only the critical struggle of philosophy against the German world; it did not
Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/intro.htm (4 of 9) [23/08/2000 18:48:47]
give a thought to the fact that philosophy up to the present itself belongs to this world and is its
completion, although an ideal one. Critical towards its counterpart, it was uncritical towards itself when,
proceeding from the premises of philosophy, it either stopped at the results given by philosophy or
passed off demands and results from somewhere else as immediate demands and results of philosophy —
although these, provided they are justified, can be obtained only by the negation of philosophy up to the
present, of philosophy as such. We reserve ourselves the right to a more detailed description of this
section: It thought it could make philosophy a reality without abolishing it.
The criticism of the German philosophy of state and right, which attained its most consistent, richest, and
last formulation through Hegel, is both a critical analysis of the modern state and of the reality connected
with it, and the resolute negation of the whole manner of the German consciousness in politics and right
as practiced hereto, the most distinguished, most universal expression of which, raised to the level of
science, is the speculative philosophy of right itself. If the speculative philosophy of right, that abstract
extravagant thinking on the modern state, the reality of which remains a thing of the beyond, if only
beyond the Rhine, was possible only in Germany, inversely the German thought-image of the modern
state which makes abstraction of real man was possible only because and insofar as the modern state
itself makes abstraction of real man, or satisfies the whole of man only in imagination. In politics, the
Germans thought what other nations did. Germany was their theoretical conscience. The abstraction and
presumption of its thought was always in step with the one-sidedness and lowliness of its reality. If,
therefore, the status quo of German statehood expresses the completion of the ancien regime, the
completion of the thorn in the flesh of the modern state, the status quo of German state science expresses
the incompletion of the modern state, the defectiveness of its flesh itself.
Already as the resolute opponent of the previous form of German political consciousness the criticism of
speculative philosophy of right strays, not into itself, but into problems which there is only one means of
solving — practice.
It is asked: can Germany attain a practice a la hauteur des principles — i.e., a revolution which will raises
it not only to the official level of modern nations, but to the height of humanity which will be the near
future of those nations?
The weapon of criticism cannot, of course, replace criticism of the weapon, material force must be
overthrown by material force; but theory also becomes a material force as soon as it has gripped the
masses. Theory is capable of gripping the masses as soon as it demonstrates ad hominem, and it
demonstrates ad hominem as soon as it becomes radical. To be radical is to grasp the root of the matter.
But, for man, the root is man himself. The evident proof of the radicalism of German theory, and hence
of its practical energy, is that is proceeds from a resolute positive abolition of religion. The criticism of
religion ends with the teaching that man is the highest essence for man — hence, with the categoric
imperative to overthrow all relations in which man is a debased, enslaved, abandoned, despicable
essence, relations which cannot be better described than by the cry of a Frenchman when it was planned
to introduce a tax on dogs: Poor dogs! They want to treat you as human beings!
Even historically, theoretical emancipation has specific practical significance for Germany. For
Germany's revolutionary past is theoretical, it is the Reformation. As the revolution then began in the
brain of the monk, so now it begins in the brain of the philosopher.
Luther, we grant, overcame bondage out of devotion by replacing it by bondage out of conviction. He
shattered faith in authority because he restored the authority of faith. He turned priests into laymen
Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/intro.htm (5 of 9) [23/08/2000 18:48:47]
because he turned laymen into priests. He freed man from outer religiosity because he made religiosity
the inner man. He freed the body from chains because he enchained the heart.
But, if Protestantism was not the true solution of the problem, it was at least the true setting of it. It was
no longer a case of the layman's struggle against the priest outside himself but of his struggle against his
own priest inside himself, his priestly nature. And if the Protestant transformation of the German layman
into priests emancipated the lay popes, the princes, with the whole of their priestly clique, the privileged
and philistines, the philosophical transformation of priestly Germans into men will emancipate the
people. But, secularization will not stop at the confiscation of church estates set in motion mainly by
hypocritical Prussia any more than emancipation stops at princes. The Peasant War, the most radical fact
of German history, came to grief because of theology. Today, when theology itself has come to grief, the
most unfree fact of German history, our status quo, will be shattered against philosophy. On the eve of
the Reformation, official Germany was the most unconditional slave of Rome. On the eve of its
revolution, it is the unconditional slave of less than Rome, of Prussia and Austria, of country junkers and
philistines.
Meanwhile, a major difficult seems to stand in the way of a radical German revolution.
For revolutions require a passive element, a material basis. Theory is fulfilled in a people only insofar as
it is the fulfilment of the needs of that people. But will the monstrous discrepancy between the demands
of German thought and the answers of German reality find a corresponding discrepancy between civil
society and the state, and between civil society and itself? Will the theoretical needs be immediate
practical needs? It is not enough for thought to strive for realization, reality must itself strive towards
thought.
But Germany did not rise to the intermediary stage of political emancipation at the same time as the
modern nations. It has not yet reached in practice the stages which it has surpassed in theory. How can it
do a somersault, not only over its own limitations, but at the same time over the limitations of the modern
nations, over limitations which it must in reality feel and strive for as for emancipation from its real
limitations? Only a revolution of radical needs can be a radical revolution and it seems that precisely the
preconditions and ground for such needs are lacking.
If Germany has accompanied the development of the modern nations only with the abstract activity of
thought without taking an effective share in the real struggle of that development, it has, on the other
hand, shared the sufferings of that development, without sharing in its enjoyment, or its partial
satisfaction. To the abstract activity on the one hand corresponds the abstract suffering on the other. That
is why Germany will one day find itself on the level of European decadence before ever having been on
the level of European emancipation. It will be comparable to a fetish worshipper pining away with the
diseases of Christianity.
If we now consider the German governments, we find that because of the circumstances of the time,
because of Germany's condition, because of the standpoint of German education, and, finally, under the
impulse of its own fortunate instinct, they are driven to combine the civilized shortcomings of the
modern state world, the advantages of which we do not enjoy, with the barbaric deficiencies of the
ancien regime, which we enjoy in full; hence, Germany must share more and more, if not in the
reasonableness, at least in the unreasonableness of those state formations which are beyond the bounds of
its status quo. Is there in the world, for example, a country which shares so naively in all the illusions of
constitutional statehood without sharing in its realities as so-called constitutional Germany? And was it
Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/intro.htm (6 of 9) [23/08/2000 18:48:47]
not perforce the notion of a German government to combine the tortures of censorship with the tortures
of the French September laws [1835 anti-press laws] which provide for freedom of the press? As you
could find the gods of all nations in the Roman Pantheon, so you will find in the Germans' Holy Roman
Empire all the sins of all state forms. That this eclecticism will reach a so far unprecedented height is
guaranteed in particular by the political-aesthetic gourmanderie of a German king [Frederick William IV]
who intended to play all the roles of monarchy, whether feudal or democratic, if not in the person of the
people, at least in his own person, and if not for the people, at least for himself. Germany, as the
deficiency of the political present constituted a world of its own, will not be able to throw down the
specific German limitations without throwing down the general limitation of the political present.
It is not the radical revolution, not the general human emancipation which is a utopian dream for
Germany, but rather the partial, the merely political revolution, the revolution which leaves the pillars of
the house standing. On what is a partial, a merely political revolution based? On part of civil society
emancipating itself and attaining general domination; on a definite class, proceeding from its particular
situation; undertaking the general emancipation of society. This class emancipates the whole of society,
but only provided the whole of society is in the same situation as this class — e.g., possesses money and
education or can acquire them at will.
No class of civil society can play this role without arousing a moment of enthusiasm in itself and in the
masses, a moment in which it fraternizes and merges with society in general, becomes confused with it
and is perceived and acknowledged as its general representative, a moment in which its claims and rights
are truly the claims and rights of society itself, a moment in which it is truly the social head and the
social heart. Only in the name of the general rights of society can a particular class vindicate for itself
general domination. For the storming of this emancipatory position, and hence for the political
exploitation of all sections of society in the interests of its own section, revolutionary energy and spiritual
self-feeling alone are not sufficient. For the revolution of a nation, and the emancipation of a particular
class of civil society to coincide, for one estate to be acknowledged as the estate of the whole society, all
the defects of society must conversely be concentrated in another class, a particular estate must be the
estate of the general stumbling-block, the incorporation of the general limitation, a particular social
sphere must be recognized as the notorious crime of the whole of society, so that liberation from that
sphere appears as general self-liberation. For one estate to be par excellence the estate of liberation,
another estate must conversely be the obvious estate of oppression. The negative general significance of
the French nobility and the French clergy determined the positive general significance of the nearest
neighboring and opposed class of the bourgeoisie.
But no particular class in Germany has the constituency, the penetration, the courage, or the ruthlessness
that could mark it out as the negative representative of society. No more has any estate the breadth of
soul that identifies itself, even for a moment, with the soul of the nation, the geniality that inspires
material might to political violence, or that revolutionary daring which flings at the adversary the defiant
words: I am nothing but I must be everything. The main stem of German morals and honesty, of the
classes as well as of individuals, is rather that modest egoism which asserts it limitedness and allows it to
be asserted against itself. The relation of the various sections of German society is therefore not dramatic
but epic. Each of them begins to be aware of itself and begins to camp beside the others with all its
particular claims not as soon as it is oppressed, but as soon as the circumstances of the time relations,
without the section's own participation, creates a social substratum on which it can in turn exert pressure.
Even the moral self-feeling of the German middle class rests only on the consciousness that it is the
common representative of the philistine mediocrity of all the other classes. It is therefore not only the
Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/intro.htm (7 of 9) [23/08/2000 18:48:47]
German kinds who accede to the throne mal a propos, it is every section of civil society which goes
through a defeat before it celebrates victory and develops its own limitations before it overcomes the
limitations facing it, asserts its narrow-hearted essence before it has been able to assert its magnanimous
essence; thus the very opportunity of a great role has passed away before it is to hand, and every class,
once it begins the struggle against the class opposed to it, is involved in the struggle against the class
below it. Hence, the higher nobility is struggling against the monarchy, the bureaucrat against the
nobility, and the bourgeois against them all, while the proletariat is already beginning to find itself
struggling against the bourgeoisie. The middle class hardly dares to grasp the thought of emancipation
from its own standpoint when the development of the social conditions and the progress of political
theory already declare that standpoint antiquated or at least problematic.
In France, it is enough for somebody to be something for him to want to be everything; in Germany,
nobody can be anything if he is not prepared to renounce everything. In France, partial emancipation is
the basis of universal emancipation; in Germany, universal emancipation is the conditio sine qua non of
any partial emancipation. In France, it is the reality of gradual liberation that must give birth to complete
freedom, in Germany, the impossibility of gradual liberation. In France, every class of the nation is a
political idealist and becomes aware of itself at first not as a particular class but as a representative of
social requirements generally. The role of emancipator therefore passes in dramatic motion to the various
classes of the French nation one after the other until it finally comes to the class which implements social
freedom no longer with the provision of certain conditions lying outside man and yet created by human
society, but rather organizes all conditions of human existence on the premises of social freedom. On the
contrary, in Germany, where practical life is as spiritless as spiritual life is unpractical, no class in civil
society has any need or capacity for general emancipation until it is forced by its immediate condition, by
material necessity, by its very chains.
Where, then, is the positive possibility of a German emancipation?
Answer: In the formulation of a class with radical chains, a class of civil society which is not a class of
civil society, an estate which is the dissolution of all estates, a sphere which has a universal character by
its universal suffering and claims no particular right because no particular wrong, but wrong generally, is
perpetuated against it; which can invoke no historical, but only human, title; which does not stand in any
one-sided antithesis to the consequences but in all-round antithesis to the premises of German statehood;
a sphere, finally, which cannot emancipate itself without emancipating itself from all other spheres of
society and thereby emancipating all other spheres of society, which, in a word, is the complete loss of
man and hence can win itself only through the complete re-winning of man. This dissolution of society as
a particular estate is the proletariat.
The proletariat is beginning to appear in Germany as a result of the rising industrial movement. For, it is
not the naturally arising poor but the artificially impoverished, not the human masses mechanically
oppressed by the gravity of society, but the masses resulting from the drastic dissolution of society,
mainly of the middle estate, that form the proletariat, although, as is easily understood, the naturally
arising poor and the Christian-Germanic serfs gradually join its ranks.
By heralding the dissolution of the hereto existing world order, the proletariat merely proclaims the
secret of its own existence, for it is the factual dissolution of that world order. By demanding the
negation of private property, the proletariat merely raises to the rank of a principle of society what
society has raised to the rank of its principle, what is already incorporated in it as the negative result of
Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/intro.htm (8 of 9) [23/08/2000 18:48:47]
society without its own participation. The proletarian then finds himself possessing the same right in
regard to the world which is coming into being as the German king in regard to the world which has
come into being when he calls the people hispeople, as he calls the horse his horse. By declaring the
people his private property, the king merely proclaims that the private owner is king.
As philosophy finds its material weapon in the proletariat, so the proletariat finds its spiritual weapon in
philosophy. And once the lightning of thought has squarely struck this ingenuous soil of the people, the
emancipation of the Germans into men will be accomplished.
Let us sum up the result:
The only liberation of Germany which is practically possible is liberation from the point of view of that
theory which declares man to be the supreme being for man. German can emancipate itself from the
Middle Ages only if it emancipates itself at the same time from the partial victories over the Middle
Ages. In Germany, no form of bondage can be broken without breaking all forms of bondage. Germany,
which is renowned for its thoroughness, cannot make a revolution unless it is a thorough one. The
emancipation of the German is the emancipation of man. The head of this emancipation is philosophy, its
heart the proletariat. Philosophy cannot realize itself without the transcendence [Aufhebung] of the
proletariat, and the proletariat cannot transcend itself without the realization [Verwirklichung] of
philosophy.
When all the inner conditions are met, the day of the German resurrection will be heralded by the
crowing of the cock of Gaul.
Index
Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/intro.htm (9 of 9) [23/08/2000 18:48:47]
Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right
Karl Marx, 1843
(Marx’s commentary on § 257 - 60 have been lost)
§ 261. In contrast with the spheres of private rights and private welfare (the family and civil society), the
state is from one point of view an external necessity and their higher authority; its nature is such that
their laws and interests are subordinate to it and dependent on it. On the other hand, however, it is the
end immanent within them, and its strength lies in the unity of its own universal end and aim with the
particular interest of individuals, in the fact that individuals have duties to the state in proportion as they
have rights against it (see § 155).
The foregoing paragraph advises us that concrete freedom consists in the identity (as it is supposed to be,
two-sided) of the system of particular interest (the family and civil society) with the system of general
interest (the state). The relation of these spheres must now be determined more precisely.
From one point of view the state is contrasted with the spheres of family and civil society as an external
necessity, an authority, relative to which the laws and interests of family and civil society are subordinate
and dependent. That the state, in contrast with the family and civil society, is an external necessity was
implied partly in the category of ‘transition’ (Übergangs) and partly in the conscious relationship of the
family and civil society to the state. Further, subordination under the state corresponds perfectly with the
relation of external necessity. But what Hegel understands by ‘dependence’ is shown by the following
sentence from the Remark to this paragraph:
§ 261.... It was Montesquieu above all who, in his famous work L’Esprit des Lois, kept in sight and tried
to work out in detail both the thought of the dependence of laws in particular, laws concerning the rights
of persons - on the specific character of the state, and also the philosophic notion of always treating the
part in its relation to the whole.
Thus Hegel is speaking here of internal dependence, or the essential determination of private rights, etc.,
by the state. At the same time, however, he subsumes this dependence under the relationship of external
necessity and opposes it, as another aspect, to that relationship wherein family and civil society relate to
the state as to their immanent end.
‘External necessity’ can only be understood to mean that the laws and interests of the family and civil
society must give way in case of collision with the laws and interests of the state, that they are
subordinate to it, that their existence is dependent on it, or again that its will and its law appear to their
will and their laws as a necessity!
But Hegel is not speaking here about empirical collisions; he is speaking about the relationship of the
‘spheres of private rights and private welfare, of the family and civil society,’ to the state; it is a question
of the essential relationship of these spheres themselves. Not only their interests but also their laws and
their essential determinations are dependent on the state and subordinate to it. it is related to their laws
and interests as higher authority, while their interest and law are related to it as its ‘subordinates’. They
exist in their dependence on it. Precisely because subordination and dependence are external relations,
limiting and contrary to an autonomous being, the relationship of family and civil society to the state is
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch01.htm (1 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:48:53]
that of external necessity, a necessity which relates by opposition to the inner being of the thing. The
very fact that the laws concerning the private rights of persons depend on the specific character of the
state and are modified according to it is thereby subsumed under the relationship of external necessity’,
precisely because civil society and family in their true, that is in their independent and complete
development, are presupposed by the state as particular spheres. ‘Subordination’ and ‘dependence’ are
the expressions for an external, artificial, apparent identity, for the logical expression of which Hegel
quite rightly uses the phrase ‘external necessity’. With the notions of ‘subordination’ and ‘dependence’
Hegel has further developed the one aspect of the divided identity, namely that of the alienation within
the unity.
On the other hand, however, it is the end immanent within them, and its strength lies in the unity of its
own universal end and aim with the particular interest of individuals, in the fact that individuals have
duties to the state in proportion as they have rights against it.
Here Hegel sets up an unresolved antinomy: on the one hand external necessity, on the other hand
immanent end. The unity of the universal end and aim of the state and the particular interest of
individuals must consist in this, that the duties of individuals to the state and their rights against it are
identical (thus, for example, the duty to respect property coincides with the right to property).
This identity is explained in this way in the Remark [to § 261]:
Duty is primarily a relation to something which from my point of view is substantive, absolutely
universal. A right, on the other hand, is simply the embodiment of this substance and thus is the
particular aspect of it and enshrines my particular freedom. Hence at abstract levels, right and duty
appear parcelled out on different sides or in different persons. In the state, as something ethical, as the
interpenetration of the substantive and the particular, my obligation to what is substantive is at the same
time the embodiment of my particular freedom. This means that in the state duty and right are united in
one and the same relation.
§ 262. The actual Idea is mind, which, sundering itself into the two ideal spheres of its concept, family
and civil society, enters upon its finite phase, but it does so only in order to rise above its ideality and
become explicit as infinite actual mind. It is therefore to these ideal spheres that the actual Idea assigns
the material of this its finite actuality, viz., human beings as a mass, in such a way that the function
assigned to any given individual is visibly mediated by circumstances, his caprice and his personal
choice of his station in life.
Let us translate this into prose as follows:
The manner and means of the state’s mediation with the family and civil society are ‘circumstance,
caprice, and personal choice of station in life’. Accordingly, the rationality of the state [Staatsvernunft]
has nothing to do with the division of the material of the state into family and civil society.
The state results from them in an unconscious and arbitrary way. Family and civil society appear as the
dark natural ground from which the light of the state emerges. By material of the state is meant the
business of the state, i.e., family and civil society, in so far as they constitute components of the state
and, as such, participate in the state.
This development is peculiar in two respects.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch01.htm (2 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:48:53]
1. Family and civil society are conceived of as spheres of the concept of the state, specifically as spheres
of its finiteness, as its finite phase. it is the state which sunders itself into the two, which presupposes
them, and indeed does this ‘only in order to rise above its ideality and become explicit as infinite actual
mind’. ‘It sunders itself in order to. . .’ It ‘therefore assigns to these ideal spheres the material of its finite
actuality in such a way that the function assigned to any given individual is visibly mediated, etc’. The
so-called ‘actual idea’ (mind as infinite and actual) is described as though it acted according to a
determined principle and toward a determined end. It sunders itself into finite spheres, and does this ‘in
order to return to itself, to be for itself’; moreover it does this precisely in such a way that it is just as it
actually is.
In this passage the logical, pantheistic mysticism appears very clearly.
The actual situation is that the assignment of the material of the state to the individual is mediated by
circumstances, caprice, and personal choice of his station in life. This fact, this actual situation is
expressed by speculative philosophy [der Spekulation] as appearance, as phenomenon. These
circumstances, this caprice, this personal choice of vocation, this actual mediation are merely the
appearance of a mediation which the actual Idea undertakes with itself and which goes on behind the
scenes. Actuality is not expressed as itself but as another reality. Ordinary empirical existence does not
have its own mind [Geist] but rather an alien mind as its law, while on the other hand the actual Idea does
not have an actuality which is developed out of itself, but rather has ordinary empirical existence as its
existence [Dasein].
The Idea is given the status of a subject, and the actual relationship of family and civil society to the state
is conceived to be its inner imaginary activity. Family and civil society are the presuppositions of the
state; they are the really active things; but in speculative philosophy it is reversed. But if the Idea is made
subject, then the real subjects - civil society, family, circumstances, caprice, etc. - become unreal, and
take on the different meaning of objective moments of the Idea.
2. The circumstance, caprice, and personal choice of station in life, through which the material of the
state is assigned to the individual, are not said directly to be things which are real, necessary, and
justified in and for themselves; qua circumstances, caprice, and personal choice they are not declared to
be rational. Yet on the other hand they again are, but only so as to be presented for the phenomena of a
mediation, to be left as they are while at the same time acquiring the meaning of a determination of the
idea, a result and product of the Idea. The difference lies not in the content, but in the way of considering
it, or in the manner of speaking. There is a two-fold history, one esoteric and one exoteric. The content
lies in the exoteric part. The interest of the esoteric is always to recover the history of the logical Concept
in the state. But the real development proceeds on the exoteric side.
Reasonably, Hegel’s sentences mean only the following:
The family and civil society are elements of the state. The material of the state is divided amongst them
through circumstances, caprice, and personal choice of vocation. The citizens of the state are members of
families and of civil society.
‘The actual Idea is mind which, sundering itself into the two ideal spheres of its concept, family and civil
society, enters upon its finite phase’ - thus the division of the state into the family and civil society is
ideal, i.e., necessary, belonging to the essence of the state. Family and civil society are actual
components of the state, actual spiritual existences of will; they are the modes of existence of the state;
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch01.htm (3 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:48:53]
family and civil society make themselves into the state. They are the active force. According to Hegel
they are, on the contrary, made by the actual Idea. It is not their own life’s course which unites them into
the state, but rather the life’s course of the Idea, which has distinguished them from itself; and they are
precisely the finiteness of this idea; they owe their existence to a mind [Geist] other than their own; they
are determinations established by a third party, not self-determinations; for that very reason they are also
determined as finiteness, as the proper finiteness of the ‘actual idea’. The purpose of their existence is not
this existence itself, but rather the Idea separates these presuppositions off from itself in order to rise
above its ideality and become explicit as infinite actual mind. This is to say that the political state cannot
exist without the natural basis of the family and the artificial basis of civil society; they are its conditio
sine qua non; but the conditions are established as the conditioned, the determining as the determined,
the producing as the product of its product. The actual idea reduces itself into the finiteness of the family
and civil society only in order to enjoy and to bring forth its infinity through their transcendence
[Aufhebung]. It therefore assigns (in order to attain its end) to these ideal spheres the material of this its
finite actuality (of this? of what? these spheres are really its finite actuality, its material) to human beings
as a mass (the material of the state here is human beings, the mass, the state is composed of them, and
this, its composition is expressed here as an action of the Idea, as a parcelling out which it undertakes
with its own material. The fact is that the state issues from the mass of men existing as members of
families and of civil society; but speculative philosophy expresses this fact as an achievement of the Idea,
not the idea of the mass, but rather as the deed of an Idea-Subject which is differentiated from the fact
itself) in such a way that the function assigned to the individual (earlier the discussion was only of the
assignment of individuals to the spheres of family and civil society) is visibly mediated by
circumstances, caprice, etc. Thus empirical actuality is admitted just as it is and is also said to be rational;
but not rational because of its own reason, but because the empirical fact in its empirical existence has a
significance which is other than it itself. The fact, which is the starting point, is not conceived to be such
but rather to be the mystical result. The actual becomes phenomenon, but the Idea has no other content
than this phenomenon. Moreover, the idea has no other than the logical aim, namely, I to become explicit
as infinite actual mind’. The entire mystery of the Philosophy of Right and of Hegelian philosophy in
general is contained in these paragraphs.
§ 263. In these spheres in which its moments, particularity and individuality, have their immediate and
reflected reality, mind is present as their objective universality glimmering in them as the power of
reason in necessity (see § 184), i.e., as the institutions considered above.
§ 264. Mind is the nature of human beings en tnasse and their nature is therefore twofold: (i) at one
extreme, explicit individuality of consciousness and will, and (ii) at the other extreme, universality which
knows and wills what is substantive. Hence they attain their right in both these respects only in so far as
both their private personality and its substantive basis are actualised. Now in the family and civil society
they acquire their right in the first of these respects directly and in the second indirectly, in that (i) they
find their substantive self-consciousness in social institutions which are the universal implicit in their
particular interests, and (ii) the Corporation supplies them with an occupation and an activity directed on
a universal end.
§ 265. These institutions are the components of the constitution (i.e., of rationality developed and
actualised) in the sphere of particularity. They are, therefore, the firm foundation not only of the state but
also of the citizen’s trust in it and sentiment towards it. They are the pillars of public freedom since in
them particular freedom is realised and rational, and therefore there is implicitly present even in them the
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch01.htm (4 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:48:53]
union of freedom and necessity.
§ 266. But mind is objective and actual to itself not merely as this (which?), necessity .... but also as the
ideality and the heart of this necessity. Only in this way is this substantive universality aware of itself as
its own object and end, with the result that the necessity appears to itself in the shape of freedom as well.
Thus the transition of the family and civil society into the political state is this: the mind of those spheres,
which is the mind of the state in its implicit moment, is now also related to itself as such, and is actual to
itself as their inner reality. Accordingly, the transition is not derived from the specific essence of the
family, etc., and the specific essence of the state, but rather from the universal relation of necessity and
freedom. Exactly the same transition is effected in the Logic from the sphere of Essence to the sphere of
Concept, and in the Philosophy of Nature from Inorganic Nature to Life. It is always the same categories
offered as the animating principle now of one sphere, now of another, and the only thing of importance is
to discover, for the particular concrete determinations, the corresponding abstract ones.
§ 267. This necessity in ideality is the inner self-development of the Idea. As the substance of the
individual subject, it is his political sentiment [patriotism] in distinction therefrom, as the substance of
the objective world, it is the organism of the state, i.e., it is the strictly political state and its constitution.
Here the subject is ‘the necessity in ideality’, the ‘Idea within itself" and the predicate is political
sentiment and the political constitution. Said in common language, political sentiment is the subjective,
and the political constitution the objective substance of the state. The logical development from the
family and civil society to the state is thus pure appearance, for what is not clarified is the way in which
familial and civil sentiment, the institution of the family and those of society, as such, stand related to the
political sentiment and political institutions and cohere with them.
The transition involved in mind existing ‘not merely as necessity and realm of appearance’ but as actual
for itself and particular as ‘the ideality of this necessity’ and the soul of this realm is no transition
whatever, because the soul of the family exists for itself as love, etc. [see §§ 161 ff.] The pure ideality of
an actual sphere, however, could exist only as knowledge [Wissenschaft].
The important thing is that Hegel at all times makes the Idea the subject and makes the proper and actual
subject, like ‘political sentiment’, the predicate. But the development proceeds at all times on the side of
the predicate.
§ 268. contains a nice exposition concerning political sentiment, or patriotism, which has nothing to do
with the logical development except that Hegel defines it as ‘simply a product of the institutions
subsisting in the state since rationality is actually present in the state’, while on the other hand these
institutions are equally an objectification of the political sentiment. Cf. the Remark to this paragraph.
§ 269. The patriotic sentiment acquires its specifically determined content from the various members of
the organism of the state. This organism is the development of the Idea to its differences and their
objective actuality. Hence these different members are the various powers of the state with their
functions and spheres of action, by means of which. the universal continually engenders itself, and
engenders itself in a necessary way because their specific character is fixed by the nature of the concept.
Throughout this process the universal maintains its identity, since it is itself the presupposition of its own
production. This organism is the constitution of the state.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch01.htm (5 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:48:53]
The constitution of the state is the organism of the state, or the organism of the state is the constitution of
the state. To say that the different parts of an organism stand in a necessary relation which arises out of
the nature of the organism is pure tautology. To say that when the political constitution is determined as
an organism the different parts of the constitution, the different powers, are related as organic
determinations and have a rational relationship to one another is likewise tautology. It is a great advance
to consider the political state as an organism, and hence no longer to consider the diversity of powers as
[in]organic, but rather as living and rational differences. But how does Hegel present this discovery?
1. ‘This organism is the development of the Idea to its differences and their objective actuality.’ It is not
said that this organism of the state is its development to differences and their objective actuality. The
proper conception is that the development of the state or of the political constitution to differences and
their actuality is an organic development. The actual differences, or the different parts of the political
constitution are the presupposition, the subject. The predicate is their determination as organic. Instead of
that, the Idea is made subject, and the differences and their actuality are conceived to be its development
and its result, while on the other hand the Idea must be developed out of the actual difference. What is
organic is precisely the idea of the differences, their ideal determination.
2. But here the Idea is spoken of as a subject which is developed to its differences. From this reversal of
subject and predicate comes the appearance that an idea other than the organism is under discussion. The
point of departure is the abstract Idea whose development in the state is the political constitution. Thus it
is a question not of the political idea, but rather of the abstract Idea in the political element. When Hegel
says, ‘this organism (namely, the state, or the constitution of the state) is the development of the Idea to
its differences, etc.’, he tells us absolutely nothing about the specific idea of the political constitution.
The same thing can be said with equal truth about the animal organism as about the political organism.
By what means then is the animal organism distinguished from the political? No difference results from
this general determination; and an explanation which does not give the differentia specifica is no
explanation. The sole interest here is that of recovering the Idea simply, the logical Idea in each element,
be it that of the state or of nature; and the real subjects, as in this case the political constitution, become
their mere names. Consequently, there is only the appearance of a real understanding, while in fact these
determinate things are and remain uncomprehended because they are not understood in their specific
essence.
‘Hence these different members are the various powers of the state with their functions and spheres of
action.’ By reason of this small word ‘hence’ [‘so’] this statement assumes the appearance of a
consequence, a deduction and development. Rather, one must ask ‘How is it’ [‘Wie so?’] that when the
empirical fact is that the various members of the organism of the state are the various powers (and) their
functions and spheres of action, the philosophical predicate is that they are members of an organism [?]
Here we draw attention to a stylistic peculiarity of Hegel, one which recurs often and is a product of
mysticism. The entire paragraph reads:
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch01.htm (6 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:48:53]
The patriotic sentiment acquires its specifically
determined content from the various members
of the organism of the state. This organism is
the development of the Idea to its differences
and their objective actuality. Hence these
different members are the various powers of the
state with their functions and spheres of action,
by means of which the universal continually
engenders itself, and engenders itself in a
necessary way because their specific character
is fixed by the nature of the concept.
Throughout this process the universal maintains
its identity, since it is itself the presupposition
of its own production. This organism is the
constitution of the state.
1. The patriotic sentiment acquires its specifically
determined content from the various members of the
organism of the state ... These different members are the
various powers of the state with their functions and
spheres of action.
2. The patriotic sentiment acquires its specifically
determined content from the various members of the
organism of the state. This organism is the development
of the Idea to its differences and their objective
actuality ... by means of which the universal continually
engenders itself, and engenders itself in a necessary
way because their specific character is fixed by the
nature of the concept. Throughout this process the
universal maintains its identity, since it is itself the
presupposition of its own production. This organism is
the constitution of the state.
As can be seen, Hegel links the two subjects, namely, the ‘various members of the organism’ and the
‘organism’, to further determinations. In the third sentence the various members are defined as the
various powers. By inserting the word ‘hence’ it is made to appear as if these various powers were
deduced from the interposed statement concerning the organism as the development of the Idea.
He then goes on to discuss the various powers. The statement that the universal continually engenders
itself while maintaining its identity throughout the process, is nothing new, having been implied in the
definition of the various powers as members of the organism, as organic members; or rather, this
definition of the various powers is nothing but a paraphrase of the statement about the organism being
‘the development of the Idea to its differences, etc.’
These two sentences are identical:
1. This organism is ‘the development of the idea to its differences and their objective actuality’ or to
differences by means of which the universal (the universal here is the same as the idea) continually
engenders itself, and engenders itself in a necessary way because their specific character is fixed by the
nature of the concept; and
2. ‘Throughout this process the universal maintains its identity, since it is itself the presupposition of its
own production.’ The second is merely a more concise explication of ‘the development of the Idea to its
differences’. Thereby, Hegel has advanced not a single step beyond the universal concept of the Idea or
at most of the organism in general (for strictly speaking it is a question only of this specific idea). Why
then is he entitled to conclude that ‘this organism is the constitution of the state’? Why not ‘this organism
is the solar system’? The reason is that he later defined the various members of the state as the various
powers. Now the statement that ‘the various members of the state are the various powers’ is an empirical
truth and cannot be presented as a philosophical discovery, nor has it in any way emerged as a result of
an earlier development. But by defining the organism as the development of the idea, by speaking of the
differences of the Idea, then by interpolating the concrete data of the various powers the development
assumes the appearance of having arrived at a determinate content. Following the statement that the
patriotic sentiment acquires its specifically determined content from the various members of the
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch01.htm (7 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:48:53]
organism of the state’ Hegel was not justified in continuing with the expression, ‘This organism. . .,’ but
rather with ‘the organism is the development of the idea, etc.’ At least what he says applies to every
organism, and there is no predicate which justifies the subject, ‘this organism’. What Hegel really wants
to achieve is the determination of the organism as the constitution of the state. But there is no bridge by
which one can pass from the universal idea of the organism to the particular idea of the organism of the
state or the constitution of the state, nor will there ever be. The opening statement speaks of the various
members of the organism of the state which are later defined as the various powers. Thus the only thing
said is that the various powers of the organism of the state, or the state organism of the various powers, is
the political constitution of the state. Accordingly, the bridge to the political constitution does not go
from the organism of the Idea and its differences, etc., but from the presupposed concept of the various
powers or the organism of the state.
In truth, Hegel has done nothing but resolve the constitution of the state into the universal, abstract idea
of the organism; but in appearance and in his own opinion he has developed the determinate reality out of
the universal Idea. He has made the subject of the idea into a product and predicate of the Idea. He does
not develop his thought out of what is objective [aus dem Gegenstand], but what is objective in
accordance with a ready-made thought which has its origin in the abstract sphere of logic. It is not a
question of developing the determinate idea of the political constitution, but of giving the political
constitution a relation to the abstract Idea, of classifying it as a member of its (the idea’s) life history.
This is an obvious mystification.
Another determination is that the specific character of the various powers is fixed by the nature of the
concept, and for that reason the universal engenders them in a necessary way. Therefore the various
powers do not have their specific character by reason of their own nature, but by reason of an alien one.
And just as the necessity is not derived from their own nature still less is it critically demonstrated. On
the contrary, their realisation is predestined by the nature of the concept, sealed in the holy register of the
Santa Casa (the Logic). The soul of objects, in this case that of the state, is complete and predestined
before its body, which ‘ is, properly speaking, mere appearance. The ‘concept’ is the Son within the
‘Idea’, within God the Father, the agens, the determining, differentiating principle. Here ‘Idea’ and
‘Concept’ are abstractions rendered independent.
§ 270. (1) The abstract actuality or the substantiality of the state consists iii the fact that its end is the
universal interest as such and the conservation therein of particular interests since the universal interest is
the substance of these. (2) But this substantiality of the state is also its necessity, since its substantiality is
divided into the distinct spheres of its activity which correspond to the moments of its concept, and these
spheres, owing to this substantiality, are thus actually fixed determinate characteristics of the state, i.e.,
its powers. (3) But this very substantiality of the state is mind knowing and willing itself after passing
through the forming process of education. The state, therefore, knows what it wills and knows it in its
universality, i.e., as something thought. Hence it works and acts by reference to consciously adopted
ends, known principles, and laws which are not merely implicit but are actually present to consciousness;
and further, it acts with precise knowledge of existing conditions and circumstances, inasmuch as its
actions have a bearing on these.
(We will look at the Remark to this paragraph, which treats the relationship of state and church, later.)
The employment of these logical categories deserves altogether special attention.
(1) The abstract actuality or the substantiality of the state consists in the fact that its end is the universal
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch01.htm (8 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:48:53]
interest as such and the conservation therein of particular interests since the universal interest is the
substance of these.
That the universal interest as such and as the subsistence of particular interests is the end of the state is
precisely the abstractly defined actuality and subsistence of the state. The state is not actual without this
end. This is the essential object of its will, but at the same time it is merely a very general definition of
this object. This end qua Being is the principle of subsistence for the state.
(2) But this (abstract actuality or) substantiality of the state is its necessity, since its substantiality is
divided into the distinct spheres of its activity which correspond to the moments of its concept, and these
spheres, owing to their substantiality, are thus actually fixed’ determinate characteristics of the state, i.e.,
its powers.
This abstract actuality or substantiality is its (the state’s) necessity, since its actuality is divided into
distinct spheres of activity, spheres whose distinction is rationally determined and which are, for that
reason, fixed determinate characteristics. The abstract actuality of the state, its substantiality, is necessity
inasmuch as the genuine end of the state and the genuine subsistence of the whole is realised only in the
subsistence of the distinct spheres of the state’s activity.
Obviously the first definition of the state’s actuality was abstract; it cannot be regarded as a simple
actuality; it must be regarded as activity, and as a differentiated activity.
The abstract actuality or the substantiality of the state ... is... its necessity, since its substantiality is
divided into the distinct spheres of its activity which correspond to the moments of its concept, and these
spheres, owing to this substantiality, are thus actually fixed determinate characteristics of the state, i.e.,
its powers.
The condition of substantiality is the condition of necessity; i.e., the substance appears to be divided into
independent but essentially determined actualities or activities. These abstractions can be applied to any
actual thing. In so far as the state is first considered according to the model of the abstract it will
subsequently have to be considered according to the model of concrete actuality, necessity, and realised
difference.
(3) But this very substantiality of the state is mind knowing and willing itself after passing through the
forming process of education. The state, therefore, knows what it wills and knows it in its universality,
i.e., as something thought. Hence it works and acts by reference to consciously adopted ends, known
principles, and laws which are not merely implicit but are actually present to consciousness; and further,
it acts with Precise knowledge of existing conditions and circumstances, inasmuch as its actions have a
bearing on these.
Now let’s translate this entire paragraph into common language as follows:
1. The self-knowing and self-willing mind is the substance of the state; (the educated self-assured mind is
the subject and the foundation, the autonomy of the state).
2. The universal interest, and within it the conservation of the particular interests, is the universal end and
content of this mind, the existing substance of the state, the nature qua state of the self-knowing and
willing mind.
3. The self-knowing and willing mind, the self-assured, educated mind attains the actualisation of this
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch01.htm (9 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:48:53]
abstract content only as a differentiated activity, as the existence of various powers, as an organically
structured power.
Certain things should be noted concerning Hegel’s presentation.
1. Abstract actuality, necessity (or substantial difference), substantiality, thus the categories of abstract
logic, are made subjects. Indeed, abstract actuality and necessity are called ‘its’, the state’s, actuality and
necessity; however (1) ‘it’ - i.e., abstract actuality or substantiality - is the state’s necessity; (2) abstract
actuality or substantiality is what is divided into the distinct spheres of its activity which correspond to
the moments of its concept. The moments of its concept are, ‘owing to this substantiality ... thus actually
fixed determinations, powers. (3) Substantiality is no longer taken to be an abstract characteristic of the
state, as its substantiality; rather, as such it is made subject, and then in conclusion it is said, ‘but this
very substantiality of the state is mind knowing and willing itself after passing through the forming
process of education’.
2. Also it is not said in conclusion that the educated, etc., mind is substantiality, but on the contrary that
substantiality is the educated, etc., mind. Thus mind becomes the predicate of its predicate.
3. Substantiality, after having been defined (1) as the universal end of the state, then (2) as the various
powers, is defined (3) as the educated, self-knowing and willing, actual mind. The real point of
departure, the self-knowing and willing mind, without which the end of the state and the powers of the
state would be illusions devoid of principle or support, inessential and even impossible existents, appears
to be only the final predicate of substantiality, which had itself previously been defined as the universal
end and as the various powers of the state. Had the actual mind been taken as the starting point, with the
universal end its content, then the various powers would be its modes of self-actualisation, its real or
material existence, whose determinate character would have had to develop out of the nature of its end.
But because the point of departure is the Idea, or Substance as subject and real being, the actual subject
appears to be only the final predicate of the abstract predicate.
The end of the state and the powers of the state are mystified in that they take the appearance of modes of
existence of the substance, drawn out of and divorced from their real existence, the self-knowing and
willing mind, the educated mind.
4. The concrete content, the actual determination appears to be formal, and the wholly abstract formal
determination appears to be the concrete content. What is essential to determinate political realities is not
that they can be considered as such but rather that they can be considered, in their most abstract
configuration, as logical-metaphysical determinations. Hegel’s true interest is not the philosophy of right
but logic. The philosophical task is not the embodiment of thought in determinate political realities, but
the evaporation of these realities in abstract thought. The philosophical moment is not the logic of fact
but the fact of logic. Logic is not used to prove the nature of the state, but the state is used to prove the
logic.
There are three concrete determinations:
1. the universal interest and the conservation therein of the particular interests as the end of the state;
2. the various powers as the actualisation of this end of the state;
3. the educated, self-assured, willing and acting mind as the subject of this end and its actualisation.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch01.htm (10 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:48:53]
These concrete determinations are considered to be extrinsic, to be hors d’oeuvres. Their importance to
philosophy is that in them the state takes on the following logical significance:
1. abstract actuality or substantiality;
2. the condition of substantiality passes over into the condition of necessity or substantial actuality;
3. substantial actuality is in fact concept, or subjectivity.
With the exclusion of these concrete determinations, which can just as well be exchanged for those of
another sphere such as physics which has other concrete determinations, and which are accordingly
unessential, we have before us a chapter of the Logic.
The substance must be ‘divided into the distinct spheres of its activity which correspond to the moments
of its concept, and these spheres, owing to this substantiality, are thus actually fixed determinate
characteristics of the state’. The gist of this sentence belongs to logic and is ready-made prior to the
philosophy of right. That these moments of the concept are, in the present instance, distinct spheres of its
(the state’s) activity and the fixed determinate characteristics of the state, or powers of the state, is a
parenthesis belonging to the philosophy of right, to the order of political fact. In this way the entire
philosophy of right is only a parenthesis to logic. It goes without saying that the parenthesis is only an
hors d’oeuvre of the real development. Cf. for example the Addition to § 270.:
Necessity consists in this, that the whole is sundered into the differences of the concept and that this
divided whole yields a fixed and permanent determinacy, though one which is not fossilised but
perpetually recreates itself in its dissolution. Cf also the Logic.
§ 271. The constitution of the state is, in the first place, the organisation of the state and the self-related
process of its organic life, a process whereby it differentiates its moments within itself and develops them
to self-subsistence.
Secondly, the state is an individual, unique and exclusive, and therefore related to others. Thus it turns its
differentiating activity outward and accordingly establishes within itself the ideality of its subsisting
inward differentiations.
Addition: The inner side of the state as such is the civil power while its outward tendency is the military
power, although this has a fixed place inside the state itself
Contents - [1] - [2] - [3] - [4] - [5] - [6] - 1844 Introduction
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch01.htm (11 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:48:53]
Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right
Karl Marx, 1843
I. THE CONSTITUTION (on its internal side only)
§ 272. The constitution is rational in so far as the state inwardly differentiates and determines its activity
in accordance with the nature of the concept. The result of this is that each of these powers is in itself the
totality of the constitution, because each contains the other moments and has them effective in itself, and
because the moments, being expressions of the differentiation of the concept, simply abide in their
ideality and constitute nothing but a single individual whole.
Thus the constitution is rational in so far as its moments can be reduced to abstract logical moments. The
state has to differentiate and determine its activity not in accordance with its specific nature, but in
accordance with the nature of the Concept, which is the mystified mobile of abstract thought. The reason
of the constitution is thus abstract logic and not the concept of the state. In place of the concept of the
constitution we get the constitution of the Concept. Thought is not conformed to the nature of the state,
but the state to a ready made system of thought.
§ 273. The state as a political entity is thus (how 'thus'?) cleft into three substantive divisions:
(a) the power to determine and establish the universal - the Legislature;
(b) the power to subsume single cases and the spheres of particularity
(c) the power of subjectivity, as the will with the power of ultimate decision the Crown. In the crown, the
different powers are bound into an individual unity which is thus at once the apex and basis of the whole,
i.e., of constitutional monarchy.
We will return to this division after examining the particulars of its explanation.
§ 274. Mind is actual only as that which it knows itself to be, and the state, as the mind of a nation, is
both the law permeating all relationships within the state and also, at the same time the manners and
consciousness of its citizens. It follows, therefore, that the constitution of any given nation depends in
general on the character and development of its self-consciousness. In its self-consciousness its
subjective freedom is rooted and so, therefore, is the actuality of its constitution ... Hence every nation
has the constitution appropriate to it and suitable for it.
The only thing that follows from Hegel's reasoning is that a state n which the character and development
of self-consciousness and the constitution contradict one another is no real state. That the constitution
which was the product of a bygone self-consciousness can become an oppressive fetter for an advanced
self-consciousness, etc., etc., are certainly trivialities. However, what would follow is only the demand
for a constitution having within itself the characteristic and principle of advancing in step with
consciousness, with actual man, which is possible only when man has become the principle of the
constitution. Here Hegel is a sophist.
(a) The Crown
§ 275. The power of the crown contains in itself the three moments of the whole (see 5 :272) viz. [a] the
universality of the constitution and the laws; [b] counsel, which refers the particular to the universal; and
[c] the moment of ultimate decision, as the self-determination to which everything else reverts and from
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (1 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
which everything else derives the beginning of its actuality. This absolute self-determination constitutes
the distinctive principle of the power of the crown as such, and with this principle our exposition is to
begin.
All the first part of this paragraph says is that both the universality of the constitution and the laws and
counsel, or the reference of the particular to the universal, are the crown. The crown does not stand
outside the universality of the constitution and the laws once the crown is understood to be the crown of
the (constitutional) monarch.
What Hegel really wants, however, is nothing other than that the universality of the constitution and the
laws is the crown, the sovereignty of the state. So it is wrong to make the crown the subject and,
inasmuch as the power of the sovereign can also be understood by the crown, to make it appear as if the
sovereign, were the master and subject of this moment. Let us first turn to what Hegel declares to be the
distinctive principle of the power of the crown as such, and we find that it is 'the moment of ultimate
decision, as the self-determination to which everything else reverts and from which everything else
derives the beginning of its actuality', in other words this 'absolute self-determination'.
Here Hegel is really saying that the actual, i.e., individual will is the power of the crown. § 12 says it this
way:
When ... the will gives itself the form of individuality..., this constitutes the resolution of the will, and it
is only in so far as it resolves that the will is an actual will at all.
In so far as this moment of ultimate decision or absolute self-determination is divorced from the
universality of content [i.e., the constitution and laws,] and the particularity of counsel it is actual will as
arbitrary choice [Willkür]. In other words: arbitrary choice's the power of the crown, or the power of the
crown is arbitrary choice.
§ 276. The fundamental characteristic of the state as a political entity is the substantial unity, i.e., the
ideality, of its moments. [a] In this unity, the particular powers and their activities are dissolved and yet
retained. They are retained, however, only in the sense that their authority is no independent one but only
one of the order and breadth determined by the Idea of the whole; from its might they originate, and they
are its flexible limbs while it is their single self.
Addition: Much the same thing as this ideality of the moments in the state occurs with life in the
physical organism.
It is evident that Hegel speaks only of the idea of the particular powers and their activities. They are to
have authority only of the order and breadth determined by the idea of the whole; they are to originate
from its might. That it should be so lies in the idea of the organism. But it would have to be shown how
this is to be achieved. For in the state conscious reason must prevail; [and] substantial, bare internal and
therefore bare external necessity, the accidental entangling of the powers and activities cannot be
presented as something rational.
§ 277. [b] The particular activities and agencies of the state are its essential moments and therefore are
proper to it. The individual functionaries and agents are attached to their office not on the strength of
their immediate personality, but only on the strength of their universal and objective qualities. Hence it is
in an external and contingent way that these offices are linked with particular persons, and therefore the
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (2 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
functions and powers of the state cannot be private property.
It is self-evident that if particular activities and agencies are designated as activities and agencies of the
state, as state functions and state powers, then they are not private but state property. That is a tautology.
The activities and agencies of the state are attached to individuals (the state is only active through
individuals), but not to the individual as physical but political; they are attached to the political quality of
the individual. Hence it is ridiculous to say, as Hegel does, that 'it is in an external and contingent way
that these offices are linked with particular persons'. On the contrary, they are linked with them by a
vinculum substantiale, by reason of an essential quality of particular persons. These offices are the
natural action of this essential quality. Hence the absurdity of Hegel's conceiving the activities and
agencies of the state in the abstract, and particular individuality in opposition to it. He forgets that
particular individuality is a human individual, and that the activities and agencies of the state are human
activities. He forgets that the nature of the particular person is not his beard, his blood, his abstract
Physis, but rather his social quality, and that the activities of the state, etc., are nothing but the modes of
existence and operation of the social qualities of men. Thus it is evident that individuals, in so far as they
are the bearers of the state's activities and powers, are to be considered according to their social and not
their private quality.
§ 278. These two points [a] and [b] constitute the sovereignty of the state. That is to say, sovereignty
depends on the fact that the particular functions and powers of the state are not self-subsistent or firmly
grounded either on their own account or in the particular will of the individual functionaries, but have
their roots ultimately in the unity of the state as their single self.
Remark to § 278.: Despotism means any state of affairs where law has disappeared and where the
particular will as such, whether of a monarch or a mob ... counts as law, or rather takes the place of law;
while it is precisely in legal, constitutional government that sovereignty is to be found as the moment of
ideality - the ideality of the particular spheres and functions. That is to say, sovereignty brings it about
that each of these spheres is not something independent, self-subsistent in its aims and modes of working,
something immersed solely in itself, but that instead, even in these aims and modes of working, each is
determined by and dependent on the aim of the whole (the aim which has been denominated in general
terms by the rather vague expression 'welfare of the state').
This ideality manifests itself in a twofold way:
(i) In times of peace, the particular spheres and functions pursue the path of satisfying their particular
aims and minding their own business, and it is in part only by way of the unconscious necessity of the
thing that their self-seeking is turned into a contribution to reciprocal support and to the support of the
whole ... In part, however, it is by the direct influence of higher authority that they are not only
continually brought back to the aims of the whole and restricted accordingly .... but are also constrained
to perform direct services for the support of the whole.
(ii) In a situation of exigency, however, whether in home or foreign affairs, the organism of which these
particular spheres are members fuses into the single concept of sovereignty. The sovereign is entrusted
with the salvation of the state at the sacrifice of these particular authorities whose powers are valid at
other times, and it is then that that ideality comes into its proper actuality.
Thus this ideality is not developed into a comprehended, rational system. In times of peace it appears
either as merely an external constraint effected by the ruling power on private life through direct
influence of higher authority, or a blind uncomprehended result of self-seeking. This ideality has its
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (3 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
proper actuality only in the state's situation of war or exigency, such that here its essence is expressed as
the actual, existent state's situation of war and exigency, while its 'peaceful' situation is precisely the war
and exigency of self-seeking.
Accordingly, sovereignty, the ideality of the state, exists merely as internal necessity, as idea. And Hegel
is satisfied with that because it is a question merely of the idea. Sovereignty thus exists on the one hand
only as unconscious, blind substance. We will become equally well acquainted with its other actuality.
§ 279. Sovereignty, at first simply the universal thought of this ideality, comes into existence only as
subjectivity sure of itself, as the will's abstract and to that extent ungrounded self-determination in which
finality of decision is rooted. This is the strictly individual aspect of the state, and in virtue of this alone
is the state one. The truth of subjectivity, however, is attained only in a subject, and the truth of
personality only in a person; and in a constitution which has become mature as a realisation of
rationality, each of the three moments of the concept has its explicitly actual and separate formation.
Hence this absolutely decisive moment of the whole is not individuality in general, but a single
individual, the monarch.
1. Sovereignty, at first simply the universal thought of this ideality, comes into existence only as
subjectivity sure of itself.. The truth of subjectivity is attained only in a subject, and the truth of
personality only in a person. In a constitution which has become mature as a realisation of rationality,
each of the three moments of the concept has ... explicitly actual and separate formation.
2. Sovereignty comes into existence only ... as the will's abstract and to that extent ungrounded
self-determination in which finality of decision is rooted. This is the strictly individual aspect of the state,
and in virtue of this alone is the state one ... (and in a constitution which has become mature as a
realisation of rationality, each of the three moments of the concept has its explicitly actual and separate
formation). Hence this absolutely decisive moment of the whole is not individuality in general, but a
single individual, the monarch.
The first sentence says only that the universal thought of this ideality, whose sorry existence we have just
seen, would have to be the self-conscious work of subjects and, as such, exist for and in them.
Had Hegel started with the real subjects as the bases of the state it would not have been necessary for him
to let the state become subjectified in a mystical way. 'However, the truth of subjectivity', says Hegel, 'is
attained only in a subject, and the truth of personality only in a person.' This too is a mystification.
Subjectivity is a characteristic of subjects and personality a characteristic of the person. Instead of
considering them to be predicates of their subjects' Hegel makes the predicates independent and then lets
them be subsequently and mysteriously converted into their subjects.
The existence of the predicate is the subject; thus the subject is the existence of subjectivity, etc. Hegel
makes the predicates, the object. independent, but independent as separated from their real independence,
their subject. Subsequently, and because of this, the real subject appears to be the result; whereas one has
to start from the real subject and examine its objectification. The mystical substance becomes the real
subject and the real subject appears to be something else, namely a moment of the mystical substance.
Precisely because Hegel starts from the predicates of universal determination instead of from the real Ens
(hypokimenou, subject), and because there must be a bearer of this determination, the mystical idea
becomes this bearer. This is the dualism: Hegel does not consider the universal to be the actual essence
of the actual, finite thing, i.e. of the existing determinate thing, nor the real Ens to be the true subject of
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (4 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
the infinite.
Accordingly, sovereignty, the essence of the state, is here first conceived to be an independent being; it is
objectified. Then, of course, this object must again become subject. However the subject then appears to
be a self-incarnation of sovereignty, which is nothing but the objectified spirit of the state's subjects.
This basic defect of the development aside, let us consider the first sentence of the paragraph. As it
stands it says nothing more than that sovereignty, the ideality of the state as person, as subject, exists
evidently as many persons, many subjects, since no single person absorbs in himself the sphere of
personality, nor any single subject the sphere of subjectivity. What kind of ideality of the state would it
have to be which, instead of being the actual self-consciousness of the citizens and the communal soul of
the state, were one person, one subject [?] Nor has Hegel developed any more with this sentence. But
consider now the second sentence which is joined with this one. What is important to Hegel is
representing the monarch as the actual, 'God-man', the actual incarnation of the Idea.
§ 279. Sovereignty ... comes into existence only ... as the will's abstract and to that extent ungrounded
self-determination in which finality of decision is rooted. This is the strictly individual aspect of the state,
and in virtue of this alone is the state one... In a constitution which has become mature as a realisation of
rationality, each of the three moments of the concept has its explicitly actual and separate formation.
Hence this absolutely decisive moment of the whole is not individuality in general, but a single
individual, the monarch.
We previously called attention to this sentence. The moment of deciding, of arbitrary yet determinate
decision is the sovereign power of will in general. The idea of sovereign power, as Hegel develops it, is
nothing other than the idea of the arbitrary, of the will's decision.
But even while conceiving of sovereignty as the ideality of the state, the actual determination of the part
through the idea of the whole, Hegel now makes it 'the will's abstract and to that extent ungrounded
self-determination in which finality of decision is rooted. This is the strictly individual aspect of the
state'. Before, the discussion was about subjectivity, now it's about individuality. The state as sovereign
must be one, one individual, it must possess individuality. The state is one not stay in this individuality;
individuality is only the natural moment of its oneness, the state's determination as nature
[Naturbestimmung]. 'Hence this absolutely decisive moment of the whole is not individuality in general,
but a single individual, the monarch.' How so? Because 'each of the three moments of the concept has its
explicitly actual and separate formation'. One moment of the concept is oneness, or unity; alone this is
not yet one individual. And what kind of constitution would it have to be in which universality,
particularity, and unity each had its explicitly actual and separate formation? Because it is altogether a
question of no abstraction but of the state, of society, Hegel's classification can be accepted. What
follows from that? The citizen as determining the universal is lawgiver, and as the one deciding, as
actually willing, is sovereign. Is that supposed to mean that the individuality of the state's will is one
individual, a particular individual distinct from all others? Universality too, legislation, has an explicitly
actual and separate formation. Could one conclude from that that legislation is these particular
individuals[?]
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (5 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
The Common Man:
2. The monarch has the sovereign power, or
sovereignty.
3. Sovereignty does what it wills.
Hegel:
2. The sovereignty of the state is the monarch.
3. Sovereignty is 'the will's abstract and to that extent
ungrounded self-determination in which finality of
decision is rooted'.
Hegel makes all the attributes of the contemporary European constitutional monarch into absolute
self-determinations of the will. He does not say the will of the monarch is the final decision, but rather
the final decision of the will is the monarch. The first statement is empirical, the second twists the
empirical fact into a metaphysical axiom. Hegel joins together the two subjects, sovereignty as
subjectivity sure of itself and sovereignty as ungrounded self-determination of the will, as the individual
Will, in order to construct out of that the Idea as 'one individual'.
It is evident that self-assured subjectivity also must actually will, must will as unity, as an individual. But
who ever doubted that the state acts through individuals? If Hegel wanted to develop the idea that the
state must have one individual as representative of its individual oneness, then he did not establish the
monarch as this individual. The only positive result of this paragraph is that in the state the monarch is
the moment of individual will, of ungrounded self-determination, of caprice or arbitrariness.
Hegel's Remark to this paragraph is so peculiar that we must examine it closely:
Remark to § 279. The immanent development of a science, the derivation of its entire content from the
concept in its simplicity ... exhibits this peculiarity, that one and the same concept - the will in this
instance - which begins by being abstract (because it is at the beginning), maintains its identity even
while it consolidates its specific determinations, and that too solely by its own activity, and in this way
gains a concrete content. Hence it is the basic moment of personality, abstract at the start in immediate
rights, which has matured itself through its various forms of subjectivity, and now - at the stage of
absolute rights, of the state, of the completely concrete objectivity of the will - has become the
personality of the state, its certainty of itself. This last reabsorbs all particularity into its single self, cuts
short the weighing of pros and cons between which it lets itself oscillate perpetually now this way and
now that, and by saying 'I will', makes its decision and so inaugurates all activity and actuality.
To begin with it is not a peculiarity of science that the fundamental concept of the thing always
reappears.
But also no advance has then taken place. Abstract personality was the subject of abstract right; there has
been no progress, because as personality of the state it remains abstract personality. Hegel should not
have been surprised at the real person - and persons make the state - reappearing everywhere as his
essence. He should have been surprised at the reverse, and yet still more at the person as personality of
the state reappearing in the same impoverished abstraction as does the person of private right.
Hegel here defines the monarch as the personality of the state, its certainty of itself. The monarch is
personified sovereignty, sovereignty become man, incarnate state - [or political - ] consciousness,
whereby all other persons are thus excluded from this sovereignty, from personality, and from state - [or
political - ] consciousness. At the same time however Hegel can give this 'Souverainété - Personne' no
more content than 'I will', the moment of arbitrariness in the will. The state-reason and
state-consciousness is a unique empirical person to the exclusion of all others, but this personified
Reason has no content except the abstract on, 'I will'. L'Etat c'est moi.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (6 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
Further, however, personality like subjectivity in general, as infinitely self-related, has its truth (to be
precise, its most elementary, immediate truth) only in a person, in a subject existing 'for' himself, and
what exists 'for' itself is just simply a unit.
It is obvious that personality and subjectivity, being only predicates of the person and the subject, exist
only as person and subject; and indeed that the person is one. But Hegel needed to go further, for clearly
the one has truth only as many one's. The predicate, the essence, never exhausts the spheres of its
existence in a single one but in many one's.
Instead of this Hegel concludes: 'The personality of the state is actual only as one person, the monarch.'
Thus, because subjectivity is actual only as subject, and the subject actual only as one, the personality of
the state is actual only as one person. A beautiful conclusion. Hegel could just as well conclude that
because the individual man is one the human species is only a single man.
Personality expresses the concept as such; but at the same time the person enshrines the actuality of the
concept, and only when the concept is determined as a person is it the Idea or truth.
To be sure, personality is merely an abstraction without the person, but only in its species-existence as
persons is person the actual idea of personality.
A so-called 'artificial [moralische] person', be it a society, a community, or a family, however inherently
concrete it may be, contains personality only abstractly, as one moment of itself In an 'artificial person',
personality has not yet achieved its true mode of existence. The state, however, is precisely this totality in
which the moments of the concept have attained the actuality correspondent to their degree of truth.
A great confusion prevails here. The artificial person, society, etc., is called abstract, precisely those
species-forms [Gattutigsgestaltungen] in which the actual person brings his actual content to existence,
objectifies himself, and leaves behind the abstraction of 'person quand même'. Instead of recognising this
actualisation of the person as the most concrete thing, the state is to have the priority in order that the
moments of the concept, individuality, attain a mystical existence. Rationality does not consist in the
reason of the actual person achieving actuality, but in the moments of the abstract concept achieving it.
The concept of the monarch is therefore of all concepts the hardest for ratiocination, i.e., for the method
of reflection employed by the Understanding. This method refuses to move beyond isolated categories
and hence here again knows only raisonnenient, finite points of view, and deductive argumentation.
Consequently it exhibits the dignity of the monarch as something deduced, not only in its form but in its
essence. The truth is, however, that to be something not deduced but purely self-originating is precisely
the concept of monarchy. Akin then to this reasoning (to be sure!) is the idea of treating the monarch's
right as grounded in the authority of God, since it is in its divinity that its unconditional character is
contained. [Remark to § 279]
In a certain sense every inevitable existent is purely self-originating; in this respect the monarch's louse
as well as the monarch. Hegel, in saying that, has not said something special about the monarch. But
should something specifically distinct from all other objects of science and of the philosophy of right be
said about the monarch, then this would be real foolishness, correct only in so far as the 'one Person-idea'
is something derived only from the imagination and not the intellect.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (7 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
We may speak of the 'sovereignty of the people' in the sense that any people whatever is self-subsistent
vis-a-vis other peoples, and constitutes a state of its own, etc. [Remark to § 279]
That is a triviality. If the sovereign is the actual sovereignty of the state then the sovereign could
necessarily be considered vis-a-vis others as a self-subsistent state, even without the people. But he is
sovereign in so far as he represents the unity of the people, and thus he is himself merely a
representative, a symbol of the sovereignty of the people. The sovereignty of the people is not due to him
but on the contrary he is due to it.
We may also speak of sovereignty in home affairs residing in the people, provided that we are speaking
generally about the whole state and meaning only what was shown above (see §§ 277-8), namely that it
is to the state that sovereignty belongs.
As though the people [das Volk] were not the real state. The state is an abstraction; the people alone is
the concrete. And it is noteworthy that Hegel, who without hesitation ascribes living qualities to the
abstraction, ascribes a living quality like that of sovereignty to the concrete [ - i.e. to the people - ] only
with hesitation and conditions.
The usual sense, however, in which men have recently begun to speak of the sovereignty of the people is
that it is something opposed to the sovereignty existent in the monarch. So opposed to the sovereignty of
the monarch, the sovereignty of the people is one of the confused notions based on the wild idea of the
'people'.
The confused notions and the wild idea are only here on Hegel's pages. Certainly if sovereignty exists in
the monarch then it is foolishness to speak of an opposed sovereignty in the people, for it lies in the
concept of sovereignty that it can have no double and absolutely opposed existence. But:
1. the question is exactly: Is not the sovereignty existent in the monarch an 1 illusion? Sovereignty of the
monarch or sovereignty of the people, that is the question;
2. a sovereignty of the people in opposition to that existent in the monarch can also be spoken of. But
then it is not a question of one and the same sovereignty taking form on two sides but rather of two
completely opposed concepts of sovereignty, one such that it can come to existence in a monarch, the
other such that it can come to existence only in a people. This is like asking, is God the sovereign or is
man? One of the two is a fiction [eine Unwarheit] even though an existing fiction.
Taken without its monarch and the articulation of the whole which is the indispensable and direct
concomitant of monarchy, the people is a formless mass and no longer a state. It lacks every one of those
determinate characteristics - sovereignty, government, judges, magistrates, class-divisions [Stände], etc.,
- which are to be found only in a whole which is inwardly organised. By the very emergence into a
people's life of moments of this kind which have a bearing on an organisation, on political life, a people
ceases to be that indeterminate abstraction which, when represented in a quite general way, is called the
'people'.
This whole thing is a tautology. If a people has a monarch and an articulation which is its indispensable
and direct concomitant, i.e., if it is articulated as a monarchy, then extracted from this articulation it is
certainly a formless mass and a quite general notion.
If by 'sovereignty of the people' is understood a republican form of government, or to speak more
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (8 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
specifically ... a democratic form, then... 1 such a notion cannot be further discussed in face of the Idea of
the state in its full development.
That is certainly correct if one has only such a notion and no developed idea of democracy.
Democracy is the truth of monarchy, monarchy is not the truth of democracy. Monarchy is necessarily
democracy in contradiction with itself, whereas the monarchial moment is no contradiction within
democracy. Monarchy cannot, while democracy can be understood in terms of itself In democracy none
of the moments obtains a significance other than what befits it. Each is really only a moment of the
whole Demos. In monarchy one part determines the character of the whole; the entire constitution must
be modified according to the immutable head. Democracy is the generic constitution; monarchy is a
species, and indeed a poor one. Democracy is content and form; monarchy should be only form, but it
adulterates the content.
In monarchy the whole, the people, is subsumed under one of its modes of existence,. the political
constitution; in democracy the constitution itself appears only as one determination, and indeed as the
self-determination of the people. In monarchy we have the people of the constitution, in democracy the
constitution of the people. Democracy is the resolved mystery of all constitutions. Here the constitution
not only in itself, according to essence, but according to existence and actuality is returned to its real
ground, actual man, the actual people, and established as its own work. The constitution appears as what
it is, the free product of men. One could say that this also applies in a certain respect to constitutional
monarchy; only the specific difference of democracy is that here the constitution is in general only one
moment of the people's existence, that is to say the political constitution does not form the state for itself.
Hegel proceeds from the state and makes man into the subjectified state; democracy starts with man and
makes the state objectified man. just as it is not religion that creates man but man who creates religion, so
it is not the constitution that creates the people but the people which creates the constitution. In a certain
respect democracy is to all other forms of the state what Christianity is to all other religions. Christianity
is the religion kat exohin, the essence of religion, deified man under the form of a particular religion. In
the same way democracy is the essence of every political constitution, socialised man under the form of a
particular constitution of the state. It stands related to other constitutions as the genus to its species; only
here the genus itself appears as an existent, and therefore opposed as a particular species to those
existents which do not conform to the essence. Democracy relates to all other forms of the state as their
Old Testament. Man does not exist because of the law but rather the law exists for the good of man.
Democracy is human existence, while in the other political forms man has only legal existence. That is
the fundamental difference of democracy.
All remaining forms of the state are certain, determined, particular forms of the state. In democracy the
formal principle is simultaneously the material principle. For that reason it is the first true unity of the
universal and the particular. In monarchy for example, or in the republic as merely a particular form of
the state, political man has his particular and separate existence beside the unpolitical, private man.
Property, contract, marriage, civil society appear here (just as Hegel quite rightly develops them for
abstract forms of the state, except that he means to develop the Idea of the state) as particular modes of
existence alongside the political state; that is, they appear as the content to which the political state
relates as organising form, or really only as the determining, limiting intelligence which says now 'yes'
now 'no' without any content of its own. In democracy the political state, as placed alongside this content
and differentiated from it, is itself merely a particular content, like a particular form of existence of the
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (9 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
people. In monarchy, for example, this particular entity, the political constitution, has the meaning of the
universal which governs and determines all the particulars. In democracy the state as particular is only
particular, and as universal it is the real universal, i.e., it is nothing definite in distinction from the other
content. The modem French have conceived it thus: In true democracy the political state disappears [der
politische Staat untergehe]. This is correct inasmuch as qua political state, qua constitution it is no longer
equivalent to the whole.
In all states distinct from democracy the state, the law, the constitution is dominant without really
governing, that is, materially permeating the content of the remaining non-political spheres. In
democracy the constitution, the law, the state, so far as it is political constitution, is itself only a
self-determination of the people, and a determinate content of the people.
Furthermore it is evident that all forms of the state have democracy for their truth, and for that reason are
false to the extent that they are not democracy.
In the ancient state the political state shaped the content of the state, with the other spheres being
excluded; the modem state is an accommodation between the political and the non-political state.
In democracy the abstract state has ceased to be the governing moment. The struggle between monarchy
and republic is itself still a struggle within the abstract form of the state. The political republic [ - that is,
the republic merely as political constitution - ] is democracy within the abstract form of the state. Hence
the abstract state-form of democracy is the republic; but here [in true democracy] it ceases to be mere
political constitution.
Property, etc., in brief the entire content of law and the state is, with small modification, the same in
North America as in Prussia. There, accordingly, the republic is a mere state form just as the monarchy is
here. The content of the state lies outside these constitutions. Hence Hegel is right when he says that the
political state is the constitution, i.e., that the material state is not political. Merely an external identity, a
mutual determination, obtains here. It was most difficult to form the political state, the constitution, out
of the various moments of the life of the people. It was developed as the universal reason in opposition to
the other spheres i.e., as something opposed to them. The historical task then consisted in their
revindication. But the particular spheres, in doing that, are not conscious of the fact that their private
essence declines in relation to the opposite essence of the constitution, or political state, and that its
opposite existence is nothing but the affirmation of their own alienation. The political constitution was
until now the religious sphere, the religion of popular life, the heaven of its universality in opposition to
the earthly existence of its actuality. The political sphere was the sole sphere of the state within the state,
the sole sphere in which the content, like the form, was species-content, the true universal, but at the
same time in such a way that, because this sphere opposed the others, its content also became formal and
particular. Political life in the modern sense is the Scholasticism of popular life. Monarchy is the fullest
expression of this alienation. The republic is the negation of this alienation within its own sphere. It is
obvious that the political constitution as such is perfected for the first time when the private spheres have
attained independent existence. Where commerce and property in land are not free, not yet autonomous,
there is also not yet the political constitution. The Middle Ages was the democracy of nonfreedom.
The abstraction of the state as such belongs only to modern times because the abstraction of private life
belongs only to modern times. The abstraction of the political state is a modern product.
In the Middle Ages there was serf, feudal property, trade corporation, corporation of scholars, etc., that
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (10 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
is, in the Middle Ages property, trade, society, man was political; the material content of the state was
fixed by reason of its form; every private sphere had a political character or was a political sphere, or
again, politics was also the character of the private spheres. In the Middle Ages the political constitution
was the constitution of private property, but only because the constitution of private property was a
political one. In the Middle Ages popular life and state [i.e., political] life were identical. Man was the
actual principle of the state, but he was unfree man. It was therefore the democracy of unfreedom,
accomplished alienation. The abstract, reflected opposition [between popular life and state-, or
political-life] belong only to modern times. The Middle Ages was the real dualism; modern times is the
abstract dualism.
At the stage at which constitutions are divided, as above mentioned, into democracy, aristocracy, and
monarchy, the point of view taken is that of a still substantial unity, abiding in itself, without having yet
embarked on its infinite differentiation and the plumbing of its own depths. At that stage, the moment of
the filial, self-determining decision of the will does not come on the scene explicitly in its owl) proper
actuality as an organic moment immanent in the state. [Remark to § 279]
In immediate monarchy, democracy, aristocracy there is yet no political constitution in distinction from
the actual material state or from the remaining content of popular life. The political state does not yet
appear as the form of the material state. Either, as in Greece, the res publica was the real private concern,
the real content of the citizens and the private man was slave, that is, the political state as political was
the true and sole content of the citizen's life and will; or, as in Asiatic despotism, the political state was
nothing but the private will of a single individual, and the political state, like the material state, was
slave. What distinguishes the modern state from these states in which a substantial unity between people
and state obtained is not that the various moments of the constitution are formed into particular actuality,
as Hegel would have it, but rather that the constitution itself has been formed into a particular actuality
alongside the real life of the people, the political state has become the constitution of the rest of the state.
§ 280. This ultimate self in which the will of the state is concentrated is, when thus taken in abstraction, a
single self and therefore is immediate individuality. Hence its natural character is implied in its very
conception. The monarch, therefore, is essentially characterised as this individual, in abstraction from all
his other characteristics, and this individual is raised to the dignity of monarchy in an immediate, natural
fashion, i.e., through his birth in the course of nature.
We have already heard that subjectivity is subject and that the subject is necessarily an empirical
individual, a one. Now we are told that the concept of naturality, of corporeality, is implied in the
concept of immediate individuality. Hegel has proven nothing but what is self-evident, namely, that
subjectivity exists only as a corporeal individual, and what is obvious, namely, that natural birth
appertains to the corporeal individual.
Hegel thinks he has proven that the subjectivity of the state, sovereignty, the monarch, is 'essentially
characterised as this individual, in abstraction from all his other characteristics, and this individual is
raised to the dignity of monarch in an immediate, natural fashion, i.e., through his birth in the course of
nature'. Sovereignty, monarchial dignity, would thus be born. The body of the monarch determines his
dignity. Thus at the highest point of the state bare Physis rather than reason would be the determining
factor. Birth would determine the quality of the monarch as it determines the quality of cattle.
Hegel has demonstrated that the monarch must be born, which no one questions, but not that birth makes
one a monarch.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (11 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
That man becomes monarch by birth can as little be made into a metaphysical truth as can the
Immaculate Conception of Mary. The latter notion, a fact of consciousness, just as well as the empirical
fact of the birth of man to the monarchy, can be understood as rooted in human illusion and conditions.
In the Remark, which we examine more closely, Hegel takes pleasure in having demonstrated the
irrational to be absolutely rational.
This transition of the concept of pure self-determination into the immediacy of' being and so into the
realm of nature is of a purely speculative character, and apprehension of it therefore belongs to logic.
Indeed it is purely speculative. But what is purely speculative is not the transition from pure
self-determination, from an abstraction, to pure naturality (to the contingency of birth), to the other
extreme, car les extrêmes se touchent. What is speculative is that this is called a 'transition of the
concept', and that absolute contradiction is presented as identity, and ultimate inconsistency presented as
consistency.
This can be considered as Hegel's positive acknowledgment: with the hereditary monarch in the place of
self-determining reason, abstract natural determinacy appears not as what it is, not as natural
determinacy, but as the highest determination of the state; this is the positive point at which the
monarchy can no longer preserve the appearance of being the organisation of the rational will.
Moreover, this transition is on the whole the same (?) as that familiar to us in the nature of willing in
general, and there the process is to translate something from subjectivity (i.e., some purpose held before
the mind) into existence. ... But the proper form of the Idea and of the transition here under consideration
is the immediate conversion of the pure self-determination of the will (i.e., of the simple concept itself)
into a single and natural existent without the mediation of a particular content (like a purpose in the case
of action). [Remark to § 280]
Hegel says that the conversion of the sovereignty of the state (of a self-determination of the will) into the
body of the born monarch (into existence) is on the whole the transition of the content in general, which
the will makes in order to actualise an end which is thought of, that is, to translate it into an existent. But
Hegel says 'on the whole'. And the proper difference which he specifies [ - namely, immediate
conversion of the pure self-determination of the will into a single and natural existent without the
mediation of a particular content - ] is so proper that it eliminates all analogy and puts magic in the place
of the 'nature of willing in general'.
First of all, the conversion of the purpose held before the mind into the existent is here immediate,
magical. Second, the subject here is the pure self-determination of the will, the simple concept itself; it is
the essence of will which, as a mystical subject, decides. It is no real, individual, conscious will; it is the
abstraction of the will which changes into a natural existent; it is the pure Idea which embodies itself as
one individual.
Third, since the actualisation of the volition in a natural existent takes place immediately, i.e., without a
medium - which the will requires as a rule in order to objectify itself - then even a particular, determinate
end is lacking; no mediation of a particular content, like a purpose in the case of action, takes place,
which is evident because no actin g subject is present, and the abstraction, the pure idea of will, in order
to act must act mystically. Now an end which is not particular is no end, and an act without an end is an
endless, senseless act. Thus this whole parallel with the teleological act of the will shows itself finally to
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (12 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
be a mystification, an empty action of the Idea. In fact, the medium here is the absolute will and the word
of the philosopher; the particular end is the end of the philosophising subject, namely, constructing the
hereditary monarch out of the pure Idea; and the actualisation of the end is Hegel's simple affirmation.
In the so-called 'ontological' proof of the existence of God, we have the same conversion of the absolute
concept into existence (the same mystification),' which conversion has constituted the depth of the Idea
in the modem world, although recently (and rightly), it has been declared inconceivable.
But since the idea of the monarch is regarded as being quite familiar to ordinary (i.e., understanding),
consciousness, the Understanding clings here all the more tenaciously to its separation and the
conclusions which its astute ratiocination deduces therefrom. As a result, it denies that the moment of
ultimate decision in the state is linked implicitly and actually (i.e. in the rational concept) with the
immediate birthright of the monarch. [Remark to § 280]
It is denied that ultimate decision is a birthright, and Hegel asserts that the monarch is the ultimate
decision through birth. But who has ever doubted that the ultimate decision in the state is joined to a real
bodily individual and is linked with the immediate birthright?
§ 281. Both moments in their undivided unity - (a) the will's ultimate ungrounded self, and (b) therefore
its similarly ungrounded objective existence (existence being the category which is at home in nature) -
constitute the Idea of something against which caprice is powerless, the 'majesty' of the monarch. In this
unity lies the actual unity of the state, and it is only through this, its inward and outward immediacy, that
the unity of the state is saved from the risk of being drawn down into the sphere of particularity and its
caprices, ends and opinions, and saved too from the war of factions round the throne and from the
enfeeblement and overthrow of the power of the state.
The two moments are [a] the contingency of the will, caprice, and [b] the contingency of nature, birth;
thus, His Majesty: Contingency. Contingency is thus the actual unity of the state.
The way in which, according to Hegel, an inward and outward immediacy [of the state] is to be saved
from collision, [due to caprice, factions,] etc., is incredible, since collision is precisely what it makes
possible.
What Hegel asserts of the elective monarch applies even more to the hereditary monarchy:
In an elective monarchy ... the nature of the relation between king and people implies that the ultimate
decision is left with the particular will, and hence the constitution becomes a Compact of Election, i.e., a
surrender of the power of the state at the discretion of the particular will. The result of this is that the
particular offices of state turn into private property, etc. [Remark to § 281]
§ 282. The right to pardon criminals arises from the sovereignty of the monarch, since it is this alone
which is empowered to actualise mind's power of making undone what has been done and wiping out a
crime by forgiving and forgetting it.
The right to pardon is the right to exercise clemency, the ultimate expression of contingent and arbitrary
choice. Significantly this is what Hegel makes the essential attribute of the monarch. In the Addition to
this very paragraph he defines the source of pardon as 'self-determined [or .groundless] decision' [die
grundlose Entscheidung].
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (13 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
§ 283. The second moment in the power of the crown is the moment of particularity, or the moment of a
determinate content and its subsumption under the universal. When this acquires a special objective
existence, it becomes the supreme council and the individuals who compose it. They bring before the
monarch for his decision the content of current affairs of state or the legal provision required to meet
existing needs, together with their objective aspects, i.e., the grounds on which decision is to be based,
the relative laws, circumstances, etc. The individuals who discharge these duties are in direct contact
with the person of the monarch and therefore the choice and dismissal alike of these individuals rest with
his unrestricted caprice.
§ 284. It is only for the objective side of decision, i.e., for knowledge of the problem and the attendant
circumstances, and for the legal and other reasons which determine its solution, that men are answerable;
in other words, it is these alone which are capable of objective proof. It is for this reason that these may
fall within the province of a council which is distinct from the personal will of the monarch as such.
Hence it is only councils or their individual members that are made answerable. The personal majesty of
the monarch, on the other hand, as the final subjectivity of decision, is above all answerability for acts of
government.
Here Hegel describes in a wholly empirical way the ministerial power as it is usually defined in
constitutional states. The only thing philosophy does with this empirical fact is to make it the existence
and the predicate of the moment of particularity in the power of the crown.
(The ministers represent the rational objective side of the sovereign will. Hence also the honor of being
answerable falls to them, while the monarch is compensated with the imaginary coin of 'Majesty'.) Thus
the speculative moment is quite poor. But then the development is based particularly on wholly empirical
grounds, and indeed very abstract and bad empirical grounds.
Thus, for example, the choice of ministers is placed in the unrestricted caprice of the monarch because
they are in direct contact with the person of the monarch, i.e., because they are ministers. In the same
way the unrestricted choice of the monarch's personal servants can be developed out of the absolute Idea.
The basis for the answerability of the ministers is certainly better: 'It is only for the objective side of
decision, i.e., for knowledge of the problem and the attendant circumstances, and for the legal and other
reasons which determine its solution, that men are answerable: in other words, it is these alone which are
capable of objective proof' Evidently 'the final subjectivity of decision', pure subjectivity, pure caprice, is
not objective, hence also capable of no objective proof nor therefore of responsibility, once an individual
is the blessed, sanctioned existence of caprice. Hegel's proof is conclusive if the constitutional provisions
are taken as the point of departure; but these provisions themselves are not proven simply by analysing
them, and this is all Hegel has done.
The whole uncritical character of Hegel's philosophy of right is rooted in this confusion.
§ 285. The third moment in the power of the crown concerns the absolute universality which subsists
subjectively in the conscience of the monarch and objectively in the whole of the constitution and the
laws. Hence the power of the crown presupposes the other moments in the state just as it is presupposed
by each of them.
§ 286. The objective guarantee of the power of the crown, of the hereditary right of succession to the
throne, and so forth, consists in the fact that just as monarchy has its own actuality in distinction from
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (14 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
that of the other rationally determined moments in the state, so these others explicitly possess the rights
and duties appropriate to their own character. In the rational organism of the state, each member, by
maintaining itself in its own position, eo ipso maintains the others in theirs.
Hegel does not see that with this third moment, the 'absolute universality', he obliterates the first two, or
vice versa. 'The power of the crown presupposes the other moments in the state just as it is presupposed
by each of them.' If this supposition is taken as real and not mystical, then the crown is established not
through birth but through the other moments, and accordingly is not hereditary but fluid, i.e., determined
by the state and assigned by turns to individuals of the state in accordance with the organisation of the
other moments. In a rational organism the head cannot be iron and the body flesh. In order to preserve
themselves the members must be equally of one flesh and blood. But the hereditary monarch is not equal,
he is of other stuff. Here the prosaic character of the rationalistic will of the other members of the state
faces the magic of nature. Moreover, members can mutually maintain themselves only in so far as the
whole organism is fluid and each of them is taken up [aufgehoben] in this fluidity, in so far as no one of
them, as in this case the head of the state, is unmoved and inalterable. Thus by means of this
determination Hegel abolishes sovereignty by birth.
A second point has to do with the question of irresponsibility. if the prince violates the whole of the
constitution, and the laws, his irresponsibility ceases because his constitutional existence ceases. But
precisely these laws and this constitution make him irresponsible. Thus they contradict themselves, and
this one stipulation abolishes law and constitution. The constitution of constitutional monarchy is
irresponsibility.
Hegel, however, is content with saying that just as monarchy has its own actuality in distinction from that
of the other rationally determined moments in the state, so these others explicitly possess the rights and
duties appropriate to their own character. Therefore he must call the constitution of the Middle Ages an
organisation. Thus Hegel has only a mass of particular spheres united in a relation of external necessity,
and indeed an individual monarch belongs only to this situation. In a state wherein each determination
exists explicitly, the sovereignty of the state must also be established as a particular individual.
Résumé of Hegel's development of the Crown
or the Idea of State Sovereignty
The Remark to § 279 says:
We may speak of the sovereignty of the people in the sense that any people whatever is self-subsistent
vis-a-vis other peoples, and constitutes a state of its own, like the British people for instance. But the
peoples of England, Scotland, or Ireland, or the peoples of Venice, Genoa, Ceylon, etc. are not sovereign
peoples at all now that they have ceased to have rulers or supreme governments of their own.
Thus here sovereignty of the people is nationality, and the sovereignty of the prince is nationality; or in
other words the principle of principality is nationality, which explicitly and exclusively forms the
sovereignty of a people. A people whose sovereignty consists only in nationality has a monarch. The
different nationality of peoples cannot be better established and expressed than by means of different
monarchs. The cleft between one .absolute individual and another is the cleft between these nationalities.
The Greeks (and Romans) were national because and in so far as they were the sovereign people. The
Germans are sovereign because and in so far as they are national. (Vid. p. xxxiv.)
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (15 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
(ad xii) A so-called 'artificial person', the same Remark says further, be it a society, a community, or a
family, however inherently concrete it may be, contains personality only abstractly, as one moment of
itself In an artificial person', personality has not achieved its true mode of existence. The state, however,
is precisely this totality in which the moments of the concept have attained the actuality correspondent to
their degree of truth.
This artificial person, society, family, etc., has personality within it only abstractly; against that, in the
monarch, the person has the state in him.
In fact, the abstract person brings his personality to its real existence only in the artificial person, society,
family, etc. But Hegel conceives of society, family, etc., the artificial person in general, not as the
realisation of the actual, empirical person but as the real person which, however, has the moment of
personality in it only abstractly. Whence also comes his notion that it is not actual persons who come to
be a state but the state which must first come to be an actual person. instead of the state being brought
forth, therefore, as the ultimate reality of the person, as the ultimate social reality of man, a single
empirical man, an empirical person, is brought forth as the ultimate actuality of the state. This inversion
of subject into object and object into subject is a consequence of Hegel's wanting to write the biography
of the abstract Substance, of the Idea, with human activity, etc., having consequently to appear as the
activity and result of something other than man; it is a consequence of Hegel's wanting to allow the
essence of man to act for itself as an imaginary individual instead of acting in its actual, human existence,
and it necessarily has as its result that an empirical existent is taken in an uncritical manner to be the real
truth of the Idea, because it is not a question of bringing empirical existence to its truth but of bringing
the truth to empirical existence, and thereupon the obvious is developed as a real moment of the idea.
(More later concerning this inevitable change of the empirical into speculation and of speculation into the
empirical.)
In this way the impression of something mystical and profound is also created. That man has been born is
quite vulgar, so too that this existence established through physical birth comes to be social man, etc.,
and citizen; man becomes everything that he becomes through his birth. But it is very profound and
striking that the idea of the state is directly born, that it has brought itself forth into empirical existence in
the birth of the sovereign. In this way no content is gained, only the form of the old content altered. It has
received a philosophical form, a philosophical certification.
Another consequence of this mystical speculation is that a particular empirical existent, a single
empirical existent in distinction from the others is conceived to be the existence of the Idea. It makes
once again a deep mystical impression to see a particular empirical existent established by the Idea, and
hence to encounter at all levels an incarnation of God.
If the modes of man's social existence, as found for example in the development of family, civil society,
state, etc., are regarded as the actualisation and objectification of man's essence, then family, civil
society, etc., appear as qualities inhering in subjects. Man then remains what is essential within these
realities, while these then appear as his actualised universality, and hence also as something common to
all men. But if, on the contrary, family, civil society, state, etc., are determinations of the idea, of
Substance as subject, then they must receive an empirical actuality, and the mass of men in which the
idea of civil society is developed takes on the identity of citizen of civil society, and that in which the
idea of the state is developed takes on that of citizen of the state. In this case the sole concern is with
allegory, i.e., with ascribing to any empirical existent the meaning of actualised Idea; and thus it is
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (16 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
evident that these receptacles have fulfilled their destiny once they have become a determinate
incarnation of a life-moment of the Idea. Consequently the universal appears everywhere as a
determinate particular thing, while the individual nowhere arrives at his true universality.
At the most profound and speculative level it therefore appears necessary when the most abstract
determinations which in no way really ripen to true social actuality, the natural bases of the state like
birth (in the case of the prince) or private property (as in primogeniture), appear to be the highest,
immediate Idea-become-man.
It is evident that the true method is turned upside down. What is most simple is made most complex and
vice versa. What should be the point of departure becomes the mystical result, and what should be the
rational result becomes the mystical point of departure.
If however the prince is the abstract person who has the state in him, then this can only mean that the
essence of the state is the abstract private person. It utters its secret only when at the peak of its
development. He is the lone private person in whom the relation of the private person in general to the
state is actualised.
The prince's hereditary character results from his concept. He is to be the person who is specified from
the entire race of men, who is distinguished from all other persons. But then what is the ultimate fixed
difference of one person from all others? The body. And the highest function of the body is sexual
activity. Hence the highest constitutional act of the king is his sexual activity, because through this he
makes a king and carries on his body. The body of his son is the reproduction of his own body, the
creation of a royal body.
Contents - [1] - [2] - [3] - [4] - [5] - [6] - 1844 Introduction
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch02.htm (17 of 17) [23/08/2000 18:49:02]
Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right
Karl Marx, 1843
(b) The Executive
§ 287. There is a distinction between the monarch's decisions and their execution and application, or in
general between his decisions and the continued execution or maintenance of past decisions, existing
laws, regulations, organisations for the securing of common ends, and so forth. This task of ... subsuming
the particular under the universal is comprised in the executive power, which also includes the powers of
the judiciary and the police. The latter have a more immediate bearing on the particular concerns of civil
society and they make the universal interest authoritative over its particular aims.
This is the usual interpretation of the executive. The only thing which can be mentioned as original with
Hegel is that he coordinates executive, police, and judiciary, where as a rule the administrative and
judiciary powers are treated as opposed.
§ 288. Particular interests which are common to everyone fall within civil society and lie outside the
absolutely universal interest of the state proper (see § 256). The administration of these is in the hands of
Corporations (see § 251), commercial and professional as well as municipal, and their officials, directors,
managers, and the like. It is the business of these officials to manage the private property and interests of
these particular spheres and, from that point of view, their authority rests on the confidence of their
commonalties and professional equals. On the other hand, however, these circles of particular interests
must be subordinated to the higher interests of the state, and hence the filling of positions of
responsibility in Corporations, etc., will generally be effected by a mixture of popular election by those
interested with appointment and ratification by higher authority.
This is a simple description of the empirical situation in some countries.
§ 289. The maintenance of the state's universal interest, and of legality, in this sphere of particular rights,
and the work of bringing these rights back to the universal, require to be superintended by holders of the
executive power, by (a) the executive civil servants and (b) the higher advisory officials (who are
organised into committees). These converge in their supreme heads who are in direct contact with the
monarch.
Hegel has not developed the executive. But given this, he has not demonstrated that it is anything more
than a function, a determination of the citizen in general. By viewing the particular interests of civil
society as such, as interests which lie outside the absolutely universal interest of the state, he has only
deduced the executive as a particular, separate power.
[Remark to § 289:] just as civil society is the battlefield where everyone's individual private interest
meets everyone else's, so here we have the struggle (a) of private interests against particular matters of
common concern and (b) of both of these together against the organisation of the state and its higher
outlook. At the same time the corporation mind, engendered when the particular spheres gain their title to
rights, is now inwardly converted into the mind of the state, since it finds in the state the means of
maintaining its particular ends. This is the secret of the patriotism of the citizens in the sense that they
know the state as their substance, because it is the state that maintains their particular spheres of interest
together with the title, authority, and welfare of these. In the corporation mind the rooting of the
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch03.htm (1 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:49:09]
particular in the universal is directly entailed, and for this reason it is in that mind that the depth and
strength which the state possesses in sentiment is seated.
This is especially worth noting:
1. because of the definition of civil society as the bellum omnium contra omnes;
2. because private egoism is revealed to be the secret of the patriotism of the citizens and the depth and
strength which the state possesses in sentiment;
3. because the 'burgher', the man of particular interest as opposed to the universal, the member of civil
society, is considered to be a fixed individual whereas the state likewise in fixed individuals opposes the
'burghers'.
One would suppose that Hegel would have to define 'civil society' as well as the 'family' as a
determination of each political individual, and so too the later state qualities as equally a determination of
the political individual. But with Hegel it is not one and the same individual who develops a new
determination of his social essence. It is the essence of the will, which allegedly develops its
determinations out of itself. The subsisting, distinct and separated, empirical existences of the state are
conceived to be immediate incarnations of one of these determinations.
Just as the universal as such is rendered independent it is immediately mixed in with what empirically
exists, and then this limited existent is immediately and uncritically taken for the expression of the Idea.
Here Hegel comes into contradiction with himself only in so far as he does not conceive of the 'family'
man in the same way he conceived of the member of civil society, I . c., as a fixed breed excluded from
other qualities.
§ 290. Division of labor... occurs in the business of the executive also. For this reason, the organisation of
officials has the abstract though difficult task of so arranging that (a) civil life shall be governed in a
concrete manner from below where it is concrete, but that (b) none the less the business of government
shall be divided into its abstract branches -armed by special officials as different centers of
administration, and further that (c) the operations of these various departments shall converge again
when they are directed on civil life from above, in the same way as they converge into a general
supervision in the supreme executive.
The Addition to this paragraph is to be considered later.
§ 291. The nature of the executive functions is that they are objective and that in their substance they
have been explicitly fixed by previous decisions (see Paragraph 287); these functions have to be fulfilled
and carried out by individuals. Between all individual and his office there is no immediate natural link.
Hence individuals are not appointed to office on account of their birth or native personal gifts. The
objective factor in their appointment is knowledge and proof of ability. Such proof guarantees that the
state will get what it requires; and since it is the sole condition of appointment, it also guarantees to every
citizen the chance of joining the class of civil servants [dem allgemeinen Stande].
§ 292. Since the objective qualification for the civil service is not genius (as it is for work as an artist, for
example), there is of necessity an indefinite plurality of eligible candidates whose relative excellence is
not determinable with absolute precision. The selection of one of the candidates, his nomination to office,
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch03.htm (2 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:49:09]
and the grant to him of full authority to transact public business-all this, as the linking of two things, a
man and his office, which in relation to each other must always be fortuitous, in the state which is
sovereign and has the last word. is the subjective aspect of election to office, and it must lie with the
crown as the power.
§ 293. The particular public functions which the monarch entrusts to officials constitute one part of the
objective aspect of the sovereignty residing in the crown. Their specific discrimination is therefore given
in the nature of the thing. And while the actions of the officials are the fulfilment of their duty, their
office is also a right exempt from contingency.
Note only the objective aspect of the sovereignty residing in the crown.
§ 294. Once an individual has been appointed to his official position by the sovereign's act (see § 292),
the tenure of his post is conditional on his fulfilling his duties. Such fulfilment is the very essence of his
appointment, and it is only consequential that he finds in his office his livelihood and the assured
satisfaction of his particular interests (see § 294), and further that his external circumstances and his
official work are freed from other kinds of subjective dependence and influence.
What the service of the state ... requires, it says in the Remark, is that men shall forgo the selfish and
capricious satisfaction of their subjective ends; by this very sacrifice, they acquire the right to find their
satisfaction in, but only in, the dutiful discharge of their public functions. In this fact, so far as public
business is concerned, there lies the link between universal and particular interests which constitutes both
the concept of the state and its inner stability (see § 260) ... The assured satisfaction of particular needs
removes the external compulsion which may tempt a man to seek ways and means of satisfying them at
the expense of his official duties. Those who are entrusted with affairs of state find in its universal power
the protection they need against another subjective phenomenon, namely the personal passions of the
governed, whose primitive interests, etc., suffer injury as the universal interest of the state is made to
prevail against them.
§ 295. The security of the state and its subjects against the misuse of power by ministers and their
officials lies directly in their hierarchical organisation and their answerability; but it lies too in the
authority given to societies and Corporations, because in itself this is a barrier against the intrusion of
subjective caprice into the power entrusted to a civil servant, and it completes from below the state
control which does not reach down as far as the conduct of individuals.
§ 296. But the fact that a dispassionate, upright, and polite demeanour becomes customary [in civil
servants], is (i) partly a result of direct education in thought and ethical conduct. Such an education is a
mental counterpoise to the mechanical and semi-mechanical activity involved in acquiring the so-called
'sciences' of matters connected with administration, in the requisite business training, in the actual work
done, etc. (ii) The size of the state, however, is an important factor in producing this result, since it
diminishes the stress of family and other personal ties, and also makes less potent and so less keen such
passions as hatred, revenge, etc. In those who are busy with the important questions arising in a great
state, these subjective interests automatically disappear, and the habit is generated of adopting universal
interests, points of view, and activities.
§ 297. Civil servants and the members of the executive constitute the greater part of the middle class, the
class in which the consciousness of right and the developed intelligence of the mass of the people is
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch03.htm (3 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:49:09]
found. The sovereign working on the middle class at the top, and Corporation-rights working on it at the
bottom, are the institutions which effectively prevent it from acquiring the isolated position of an
aristocracy and using its education and skill as means to an arbitrary tyranny.
Addition to § 297. The middle class, to which civil servants belong, is politically conscious and the one
in which education is most prominent. ... It is a prime concern of the state that a middle class should be
developed, but this can be done only if the state is an organic unity like the one described here, i.e., it can
be done only by giving authority to spheres of particular interests, which are relatively independent, and
by appointing an army of officials whose personal arbitrariness is broken against such authorised bodies.
Action in accordance with everyone's rights, and the habit of such action, is a consequence of the
counterpoise to officialdom which independent and self-subsistent bodies create.
What Hegel says about 'the Executive' does not merit the name of a philosophical development. Most of
the paragraphs could be found verbatim in the Prussian Landrecht. Yet the administration proper is the
most difficult point of the development.
Because Hegel has already claimed the police and the judiciary to be spheres of civil society, the
executive is nothing but the administration, which he develops as the bureaucracy.
First of all, the 'Corporations', as the self-government of civil society, presuppose the bureaucracy. The
sole determination arrived at is that the choice of the administrators and their officials, etc., is a mixed
choice originating from the members of civil society and ratified by the proper authority (or as Hegel
says, 'higher authority').
Over this sphere, for the maintenance of the state's universal interest and of legality, stand holders of the
executive power, the executive civil servants and the advisory officials, which converge into the
monarch.
A division of labour occurs in the business of the executive. Individuals must prove their capability for
executive functions, i.e., they must sit for examinations. The choice of the determinate individual for
civil service appointment is the prerogative of the royal authority. The distribution of these functions is
given in the nature of the thing. The official function is the duty and the life's work of the civil servants.
Accordingly they must be paid by the state. The guarantee against malpractice by the bureaucracy is
partly its hierarchy and answerability, and on the other hand the authority of the societies and
Corporations; its humaneness is a result partly of direct education in thought and ethical conduct and
partly of the size of the state. The civil servants form the greater part of the middle class. The safeguard
against its becoming like an aristocracy and tyranny is partly the sovereign at the top and partly
Corporation-rights at the bottom. The middle class is the class of education. Voila tout! Hegel gives us an
empirical description of the bureaucracy, partly as it actually is, and partly according to the opinion
which it has of itself And with that the difficult chapter on 'the Executive' is brought to a close.
Hegel proceeds from the separation of the state and civil society, the separation of the particular interests
and the absolutely universal; and indeed the bureaucracy is founded on this separation. Hegel proceeds
from the presuppositon of the Corporations; and indeed the bureaucracy presupposes the Corporations, in
any event the 'corporation mind'. Hegel develops no content of the bureaucracy, but merely some general
indications of its formal organisation; and indeed the bureaucracy is merely the formalism of a content
which lies outside the bureaucracy itself.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch03.htm (4 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:49:09]
The Corporations are the materialism of the bureaucracy, and the bureaucracy is the spiritualism of the
Corporations. The Corporation is the bureaucracy of civil society, and the bureaucracy is the Corporation
of the state. In actuality, the bureaucracy as civil society of the state is opposed to the state of civil
society, the Corporations. Where the bureaucracy is to become a new principle, where the universal
interest of the state begins to become explicitly a singular and thereby a real interest, it struggles against
the Corporations as every consequence struggles against the existence of its premises. On the other hand
once the real life of the state awakens and civil society frees itself from the Corporations out of its
inherent rational impulse, the bureaucracy seeks to restore them; for as soon as the state of civil society
falls so too does the civil society of the state. The spiritualism vanishes with its opposite materialism.
The consequence struggles for the existence of its premises as soon as a new principle struggles not
against the existence of the premises but against the principle of their existence. The same mind that
creates the Corporation in society creates the bureaucracy in the state. Thus as soon as the corporation
mind is attacked so too is the mind of the bureaucracy; and whereas the bureaucracy earlier fought the
existence of the Corporations in order to create room for its own existence, now it seeks vigorously to
sustain the existence of the Corporations in order to save the Corporation mind, which is its own mind.
The bureaucracy is the state formalism of civil society. It is the state's consciousness, the state's will, the
state's power, as a Corporation. (The universal interest can behave vis-a-vis the particular only as a
particular so long as the particular behaves vis-a vis the universal as a universal. The bureaucracy must
thus defend the imaginary universality of particular interest, i.e., the Corporation mind, in order to defend
the imaginary particularity of the universal interests, i.e., its own mind. The state must be Corporation so
long as the Corporation wishes to be state.) Being the state's consciousness, will, and power as a
Corporation, the bureaucracy is thus a particular, closed society within the state. The bureaucracy wills
the Corporation as an imaginary power. To be sure, the individual Corporation also has this will for its
particular interest in opposition to the bureaucracy, but it wills the bureaucracy against the other
Corporation, against the other particular interest. The bureaucracy as the completed Corporation
therefore wins the day over the Corporation which is like incomplete bureaucracy. It reduces the
Corporation to an appearance, or wishes to do so, but wishes this appearance to I exist and to believe in
its own existence. The Corporation is civil society's attempt to become state; but the bureaucracy is the
state which has really made itself into civil society.
The state formalism, which the bureaucracy is, is the state as formalism, and Hegel has described it
precisely as such a formalism. Because this state formalism constitutes itself as a real power and
becomes itself its own material content, it is evident that the bureaucracy is a tissue of practical illusion,
or the illusion of the state. The bureaucratic mind is through and through a Jesuitical, theological mind.
The bureaucrats are the Jesuits and theologians of the state. The bureaucracy is la république prêtre.
Since the bureaucracy according to its essence is the state as formalism, so too it is according to its end.
The real end of the state thus appears to the bureaucracy as an end opposed to the state. The mind of the
bureaucracy is the formal mind of the state. It therefore makes the formal mind of the state, or the real
mindlessness of the state, a categorical imperative. The bureaucracy asserts itself to be the final end of
the state. Because the bureaucracy makes its formal aims its content, it comes into conflict everywhere
with the real aims. Hence it is obliged to present what is formal for the content and the content for what
is formal. The aims of the state are transformed into aims of bureaus, or the aims of bureaus into the aims
of the state. The bureaucracy is a circle from which no one can escape. its hierarchy is a hierarchy of
knowledge. The highest point entrusts the understanding of particulars to the lower echelons, whereas
these, on the other hand, credit the highest with an understanding in regard to the universal; and thus they
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch03.htm (5 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:49:09]
deceive one another.
The bureaucracy is the imaginary state alongside the real state; it is the spiritualism of the state. As a
result everything has a double meaning, one real and one bureaucratic, just as knowledge is double, one
real and one bureaucratic (and the same with the will). A real thing, however, is treated according to its
bureaucratic essence, according to its otherworldly, spiritual essence. The bureaucracy has the being of
the state, the spiritual being of society, in its possession; it is its private property. The general spirit of the
bureaucracy is the secret, the mystery, preserved inwardly by means of the hierarchy and externally as a
closed corporation. To make public -the mind and the disposition of the state appears therefore to the
bureaucracy as a betrayal of its mystery. Accordingly authority is the principle of its knowledge and
being, and the deification of authority is its mentality. But at the very heart of the bureaucracy this
spiritualism turns into a crass materialism, the materialism of passive obedience, of trust in authority, the
mechanism of an ossified and formalistic behaviour, of fixed principles, conceptions, and traditions. As
far as the individual bureaucrat is concerned, the end of the state becomes his private end: a pursuit of
higher posts, the building of a career. In the first place, he considers real life to be purely material, for the
spirit of this life has its separate existence in the bureaucracy. Thus the bureaucrat must make life as
materialistic as possible. Secondly, real life is material for the bureaucrat, i.e . in so far as it becomes an
object of bureaucratic action, because his spirit is prescribed for him, his end lies outside of him, his
existence is the existence of the bureau. The state, then, exists only as various bureau-minds whose
connection consists of subordination and dumb obedience. Real knowledge appears to be devoid of
content just as real life appears to be dead, for this imaginary knowledge and life pass for what is real and
essential. Thus the bureaucrat must use the real state Jesuitically, no matter whether this Jesuitism be
conscious or unconscious. But given that his antithesis is knowledge, it is inevitable that he likewise
attain to self-consciousness and, at that moment, deliberate Jesuitism. While the bureaucracy is on one
hand this crass materialism, it manifests its crass spiritualism in its will to do everything, i.e., in its
making the will the causa prima, for it is pure active existence which receives its content from without;
thus it can manifest its existence only through forming and restricting this content. The bureaucrat has
the world as a mere object of his action.
When Hegel calls the Executive power the objective aspect of the sovereignty residing In the crown, it is
precisely in the same sense that the Catholic Church was the real existence of the sovereignty, content,
and spirit of the Blessed Trinity. In the bureaucracy the identity of the state's interest and the particular
private aim is established such that the state's interest becomes a particular private aim opposed to the
other private aims.
The abolition [Aufhebung] of the bureaucracy can consist only in the universal interest becoming
really-and not, as with Hegel, becoming purely in thought, in abstractions particular interest; and this is
possible only through the particular interest really becoming universal. Hegel starts from an unreal
opposition and thereby brings it to a merely imaginary identity which, in fact, is itself all the more
contradictory. Such an identity is the bureaucracy.
Now let's follow his development in its particulars.
The sole philosophical statement which Hegel makes concerning the Executive is that of the 'subsuming'
of the individual and particular under the universal, etc.
Hegel is satisfied with that. On one hand, the category of 'subsumption' of the particular, etc. This
category must be actualised. Now, he picks anyone of the empirical existences of the Prussian or Modern
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch03.htm (6 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:49:09]
state (just as it is), which among other things actualises this category even though this category does not
express its specific nature. Applied mathematics is also a subsuming of the particular, etc. Hegel doesn't
enquire whether this is the rational, the adequate mode of subsumption. He holds fast only to the one
category and is satisfied with finding a corresponding existence for it. Hegel gives his logic a political
body; he does not give the logic of the political body (§ 287).
On the relationship of the Corporations and societies to the executive we are told first of all that it is
required that their administration (the nomination of their magistracy) generally be effected by a mixture
of popular election by those interested with appointment and ratification by higher authority. The mixed
choice of administrators of the societies and Corporations would thus be the first relationship between
civil society and state or executive, their first identity (§ 288). This identity, according to Hegel himself,
is quite superficial, a mixtum compositum, a mixture. To the degree that this identity is superficial,
opposition is sharp. It is the business of these officials (namely the officials of the Corporations,
societies, etc.) to manage the private property and interests of these particular spheres and, from that
Point of view, their authority rests on the confidence of their commonalties and professional equals. On
the other hand, however, these circles of particular interests must be subordinated to the higher interests
of the state. From this results the so-called 'mixed choice'.
The administration of the Corporation thus has within it the opposition of private property and interest of
the particular spheres against the higher interest of the state: opposition between private property and
state.
We need not emphasise that the resolution of this opposition in the mixed choice is a simple
accommodation, a treaty, an avowal of the unresolved dualism which is itself a dualism, a mixture. The
particular interests of the Corporations and societies have a dualism within their own sphere, which
likewise shapes the character of their administration.
However, the crucial opposition stands out first in the relationship of these 'particular interests which are
common to everyone', etc., which 'lie outside the absolutely universal interest of the state proper', and
this 'absolutely universal interest of the state proper'. But the first instance once again, it is within this
sphere.
The maintenance of the state's universal interest, and of legality, in this sphere of particular rights, and
the work of bringing these rights back to the universal, require to be superintended by holders of the
executive power, by (a) the executive civil servants, and (b) the higher advisory officials (who are
organised into committees). These converge in their supreme heads who are in direct contact with the
monarch. (§ 289)
Incidentally, let us draw attention to the construction of the executive committees, which are unknown,
for example, in France. To the same extent that Hegel adduces these officials as advisory it is certainly
obvious that they are organised into committees.
Hegel has the state proper, the executive, move into the management of the state's universal interest and
of legality, etc. within civil society via holders [of the executive power]; and according to him these
executive office holders, the executive civil servants are in reality the true representation of the state, not
'of 'but 'against' civil society. The opposition between state and civil society is thus fixed; the state does
not reside within but outside of civil society; it affects civil society merely through office holders to
whom is 1 entrusted the management of the state within this sphere. The opposition is not overcome by
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch03.htm (7 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:49:09]
means of these office holders but has become a legal and fixed opposition. The state becomes something
alien to the nature of civil society; it becomes this nature's otherworldly realm of deputies which makes
claims against civil society. The police, the judiciary, and the administration are not deputies of civil
society itself, which manages its own general interest in and through them. Rather, they are office
holders of the state whose purpose is to manage the state in opposition to civil society. Hegel clarifies
this opposition further in the candid Remark to § 289 which we examined earlier.'
The nature of the executive functions is that they are objective and ... have been explicitly fixed by
previous decisions. (§ 291)
Does Hegel conclude from this that [the executive functions] all the more easily require no hierarchy of
knowledge, that they could be executed perfectly by civil society itself? On the contrary.
He makes the profound observation that they are to be executed by individuals, and that between them
and these individuals there is no immediate natural link. This is an allusion to the crown, which is
nothing but the ' natural power of arbitrary choice, and thus can be born. The crown is nothing but the
representative of the natural moment in the will, the dominion of physical nature in the state.
The executive civil servants are distinguished by the fact that they earn their appointments; hence they
are distinguished essentially from the sovereign.
The objective factor in their appointment (namely, to the State's business) is knowledge (subjective
caprice lacks this factor) and proof of ability. Such proof guarantees that the state will get what it
requires; and since it is the sole condition of appointment, it also guarantees to every citizen the chance
of joining the class of civil servants [dem allgemeinen Stande].
The chance which every citizen has to become a civil servant is thus the second affirmative relationship
between civil society and state, the second identity. Like the first it is also of a quite superficial and
dualistic nature. Every Catholic has the chance to become a priest (i.e., to separate himself from the laity
as well as the world). Does the clergy on that account face the Catholic any less as an opposite power?
That each has the possibility of gaining the privilege of another sphere proves only that his own sphere is
not the actuality of this privilege.
In a true state it is not a question of the possibility of every citizen to dedicate himself to the universal in
the form of a particular class, but of the capability of the universal class to be really universal, i.e., to be
the class of every citizen. But Hegel proceeds from the postulate of the pseudo-universal, the illusory
universal class, universality fixed in the form of a particular class.
The identity which he has constructed between civil society and the state is the identity of two hostile
armies in which each soldier has the 'chance' to become through desertion a member of the other hostile
army; and in this Hegel indeed correctly describes the present empirical state of affairs.
It is the same with his construction of the examinations. In a rational state, taking an examination belongs
more properly to becoming a shoe-maker than an executive civil servant because shoemaking is a skill
without which one can be a good citizen of the state, a social man; but the necessary state knowledge is a
condition without which a person in the state lives outside the state, is cut off from himself, deprived of
air. The examination is nothing other than a masonic rite, the legal recognition of the privileged
knowledge of state citizenship.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch03.htm (8 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:49:09]
The link of state office and individual, this objective bond between the knowledge of civil society and the
knowledge of the state, in other words the examination, is nothing but the bureaucratic baptism of
knowledge, the official recognition of the transubstantiation of profane into holy knowledge (it goes
without saying that in the case of every examination the examiner knows all). No one ever heard of the
Greek or Roman statesmen taking an examination. But then what is a Roman statesmen even as against a
Prussian official!
In addition to the objective bond of the individual with the state office, in addition, that is, to the
examination, there is another bond - royal caprice:
Since the objective qualification for the civil service is not genius (as it is for work, an artist, for
example), there is of necessity an indefinite plurality of eligible candidates whose relative excellence is
not determinable with absolute precision. The selection of one of the candidates, his nomination to office,
and the grant to him of full authority to transact public business-all this, as the linking of two things, a
man and his office, which in relation to each other must always be fortuitous, is the subjective aspect of
election to office, and it must lie with the crown as the power in the state which is sovereign and has the
last word. [§ 292.]
The prince is at all times the representative of chance or contingency.
Besides the objective moment of the bureaucratic confession of faith (the examination) there belongs in
addition the subjective [moment] of the royal favour, in order that the faith yield fruit.
The particular public functions which the monarch entrusts to officials constitute one part of the
objective aspect of the sovereignty residing in the crown. (The monarch distributes and entrusts the
particular state activities as functions to the officials, i.e., he distributes the state among the bureaucrats,
entrusts it like the holy Roman Church entrusts consecrations Monarchy is a system of emanation; the
monarch leases out the functions of the state.) Here Hegel distinguishes for the first time the objective
aspect front the subjective aspect of the sovereignty residing in the Crown. Prior to this he mixed the two
together. The sovereignty residing in the crown is taken here in a clearly mystical way, just as
theologians find the personal God in nature. Earlier it still meant that the crown is the subjective aspect
of the sovereignty residing in the state (§ 293).
In § 294 Hegel develops the salary of the civil servants out of the Idea. Here the real identity of civil
society and the state is established in the salary of the civil servants, or in the fact that civil service also
guarantees security in empirical existence. The wage of the civil servant is the highest identity which
Hegel constructs out of all this. The transformation of the activities of the state into ministries
presupposes the separation of the state from society.
When Hegel says in the Remark to § 294:
What the service of the state. . . requires is that men shall forgo the selfish and capricious satisfaction of
their subjective ends, (this is required in the case of every post of service) and by this very sacrifice they
acquire the right to find their satisfaction in, but only in, the dutiful discharge of their public functions. In
this fact, so far as public business is concerned, there lies the link between universal and particular
interests which constitutes both the concept of the state and its inner stability,
this holds good (1.) of every servant, and (2.) it is correct that the salary of the civil servants constitutes
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch03.htm (9 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:49:09]
the inner stability of the most modern monarchies. in contrast to the member of civil society only the
civil servants existence is guaranteed.
At this point Hegel cannot fail to see that he has constructed the executive as an antithesis to civil
society, and indeed as a dominant extreme. How does he now establish a condition of Identity?
According to § 295 the security of the state and its subjects against the misuse [den Missbrauch] of
power by ministers and their officials lies partly in their hierarchical organisation (as if the hierarchy
itself were not the principal abuse [der Hauptmissbrauch], and the matching personal sins of the civil
servants were not it all to be compared with their inevitable hierarchical sins; the hierarchy punishes the
civil servant to the extent that he sins against the hierarchy or commits a sin in excess of the hierarchy;
but it takes him under its protection when the hierarchy sins through him; moreover the hierarchy is only
with great difficulty convinced of the sins of its member) and in the authority given to societies and
Corporations, because in itself this is a barrier against the intrusion of subjective caprice into the power
entrusted to a civil servant, and it completes front below the state control (as if this control were not
exercised with the outlook of the bureaucratic hierarchy) winch does not reach down as far as the
conduct of individuals.
Thus the second guarantee against the caprice of the bureaucracy lies in the privileges of the
Corporations.
Thus if we ask Hegel what is civil society's protection against the bureaucracy, he answers:
1. The hierarchal organisation of the bureaucracy. Control. This, that the adversary is himself bound
hand and foot, and if he is like a hammer vis-a-vis those below he is like all anvil in relation to those
above. Now, where is the protection against the hierarchy? The lesser evil will surely be abolished
through the greater inasmuch as it vanishes in comparison with it.
2. Conflict, the unresolved conflict between bureaucracy and Corporation. Struggle, the possibility of
struggle, is the guarantee against being overcome. Later (§ 297) in addition to this Hegel adds as
guarantee the 'institutions [of] the sovereign working ... at the top', by which is to be understood, once
again, the hierarchy.
However Hegel further adduces two moments (§ 296):
In the civil servant himself, something which is supposed to humanise him and make dispassionate,
upright, and polite demeanour customary, namely, direct education in thought and ethical conduct, which
is said to hold 'the mental counterpoise' to the mechanical character of his knowledge and actual work.
As if the mechanical character of his bureaucratic knowledge and his actual work did not hold the
'counterpoise' to his education in thought and ethical conduct. And will not his actual mind and his actual
work as substance triumph over the accident of his prior endowment? His office is indeed his substantial
situation and his bread -and butter. Fine, except that Hegel sets direct education in thought and ethical
conduct against the mechanism of bureaucratic knowledge and work! The man within the civil servant is
supposed to secure the civil servant against himself. What a unity! Mental counterpoise. What a dualistic
category!
Hegel further adduces the size of the state, which in Russia certainly doesn't guarantee against the caprice
of the executive civil servants, and in any case is a circumstance which lies outside the 'essence' of the
bureaucracy.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch03.htm (10 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:49:09]
Hegel has developed the 'Executive' as bureaucratic officialdom [Staatsbediententum].
Here in the sphere of the 'absolutely universal interest of the state proper' we find nothing but unresolved
conflict. The civil servants' examination and livelihood constitute the final synthesis.
Hegel adduces the impotency of the bureaucracy, its conflict with the Corporation, as its final
consecration.
In § 297 an identity is established in so far as 'civil servants and the members of the executive constitute
the greater part of the middle class'. Hegel praises this 'middle class' as the pillar of the state so far as
honesty and intelligence are concerned (in the Addition to this paragraph).
It is a prime concern of the state that a middle class should be developed, but this can be done only if the
state is an organic unity like the one described here, i.e., it can be done only by giving authority to
spheres of particular interests, which are relatively independent, and by appointing an army of officials
whose personal arbitrariness is broken against such authorised bodies.
To be sure the people can appear as one class, the middle class, only in such an organic unity; but is
something that keeps itself going by means of the counterbalancing of privileges an organic unity? The
executive power is the one most difficult to develop; it, much more than the legislature, belongs to the
entire people.
Later (in the Remark to § 308) Hegel expresses the proper spirit of the bureaucracy when he
characterises it as 'business routine' and the 'horizon of a restricted sphere'.
Contents - [1] - [2] - [3] - [4] - [5] - [6] - 1844 Introduction
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch03.htm (11 of 11) [23/08/2000 18:49:09]
Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right
Karl Marx, 1843
(c) The Legislature
§ 298. The legislature is concerned (a) with the laws as such in so far as they require fresh and extended
determination; and (b) with the content of home affairs affecting the entire state (a very general
expression). The legislature is itself a part of the constitution which is presupposed by it and to that
extent lies absolutely outside the sphere directly determined by it; nonetheless, the constitution becomes
progressively more mature in the course of the further elaboration of the laws and the advancing
character of the universal business of government.
Above all it is noteworthy that Hegel emphasises the way in which the legislature is itself a part of the
constitution which is presupposed by it and lies absolutely outside the sphere directly determined by it,
since he had made this statement neither of the Crown nor of the Executive, for both of which it is
equally true. But only with the Legislature does Hegel construct the constitution in its entirety, and thus
he is unable to presuppose it. However, we recognise his profundity precisely in the way he always
begins with and accentuates the antithetical character of the determinate elements (as they exist in our
states).
The legislature is itself a part of the constitution which lies absolutely outside the sphere directly
determined by it. But the constitution is certainly not self-generating. The laws which 'require fresh and
extended determination' must have received formulation. A legislature must exist or have existed before
and outside of the constitution. There must exist a legislature outside of the actual empirical, established
legislature. But, Hegel will answer, we presuppose an existing state. Hegel, however, is a philosopher of
right, and develops the generic idea of the state [die Staatsgattung]. He is not allowed to measure the idea
by what exists; he must measure what exists by the idea.
The collision is simple. The legislature is the power which is to organise the universal. it is the power of
the constitution. It extends beyond the constitution.
On the other hand, however, the legislature is a constitutional power. Thus it is subsumed under the
constitution. The constitution is law for the legislature. It has given laws to the legislature and continues
to do so. The legislature is only legislature within the constitution, and the constitution would stand hors
de loi if it stood outside the legislature. Voilà la collision! In recent French history much nibbling away
[at the constitution] has occurred.
How does Hegel resolve this antinomy?
First of all it is said that the constitution is presupposed by the legislature and to that extent it lies
absolutely outside the sphere directly determined by it. 'Nonetheless' - nonetheless in the course of the
further elaboration of the laws and the advancing character of the universal business of government it
becomes progressively more mature.
That is to say, then: directly, the constitution lies outside the sphere of the legislature; indirectly,
however, the legislature modifies the constitution. The legislature does in an indirect way what it neither
can nor may do in a direct way. It picks the constitution apart enti détail, since it cannot alter it en gros. It
does by virtue of the nature of things and circumstances what according to the constitution it was not
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (1 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
supposed to do. it does materially and in fact what it does not do formally, legally, or constitutionally.
With that, Hegel has not resolved the antinomy; he has simply transformed it into another antinomy. He
has placed the real effect of the legislature, its constitutional effect, in contradiction with its
constitutionally determined character. The opposition between constitution and legislature remains.
Hegel has defined the factual and the legal action of the legislature as a contradiction - the contradiction
between what the legislature should be and what it really is, between what it believes itself to be doing
and what it really does.
How call Hegel present this contradiction as the truth? 'The advancing character of the 'universal
business of government' enlightens us just as little, for it is precisely this advancing character which
needs explanation.
In the Addition [to this paragraph] Hegel contributes hardly anything to the solution of these problems.
He does, however, bring them more into focus:
The constitution must in and by itself be the fixed and recognised ground on which the legislature stands,
and for this reason it must not first be constructed. Thus the constitution is, but just as essentially it
becomes, i.e., it advances and matures. This advance is an alteration which is imperceptible and which
lacks the form of alteration.
That is to say, according to the law (illusion) the constitution is, but according to reality (truth) it
becomes. According to its determinate character the constitution is unalterable; but it really is changed,
only this change is unconscious and lacks the form of alteration. The appearance contradicts the essence.
The appearance is the conscious law of the constitution, and the essence is its unconscious law, which
contradicts the other. What is in the nature of the thing is not found in the law. Rather, the opposite is in
the law.
Is it the fact, then, that in the state - which, according to Hegel, is the highest existence of freedom, the
existence of self-conscious reason - not law, the existence of freedom, but rather blind natural necessity
governs? And if the law of the thing is recognised as contradicting the legal definition, why not
acknowledge the law of the thing, in this case reason, ,is the law of the state? And how then consciously
retain this dualism? Hegel wants always to present the state as the actualisation of free mind; however, re
vera he resolves all difficult conflicts through a natural necessity which is the antithesis of freedom.
Thus, the transition of particular interest into universal interest is not a conscious law of the state, but is
mediated through chance and ratified contrary to consciousness. And in the state Hegel wants
everywhere the realisation of free will! (Here we see Hegel's substantial viewpoint.)
Hegel uses as examples to illustrate the gradual alteration of the constitution the conversion of the private
wealth of the German princes and their families into state property, and the conversion of the German
emperors' personal administration of justice into an administration through delegates. His choice of
examples is unfortunate. in the first case, for instance, the transition happened only in such a way that all
state property was transformed into royal private property.
Moreover, these changes are particular. Certainly, entire state constitutions have changed such that as
new requirements gradually arose the old broke down; but for the new constitution a real revolution was
always necessity.
Hence the advance from one state of affairs to another, Hegel concluded [in the Addition], is tranquil in
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (2 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
appearance and unnoticed. In this way a constitution changes over a long period of time into something
quite different from what it was originally.
The category of gradual transition is, first of all, historically false; and secondly, it explains nothing.
In order not only that the constitution be altered, thus that this illusory appearance not be in the end
forcefully shattered, but also that man do consciously what he is otherwise forced to do unconsciously by
the nature of the thing, it is necessary that the movement of the constitution, that progress, be made the
principle of the constitution, thus that the real corner stone of the constitution, the people, be made the
principle of the constitution. Progress itself is then the constitution.
Should the constitution itself, therefore, belong within the domain of the legislature? This question can
be posed only (1) if the political state exists as the pure formalism of the actual state, if the political state
is a domain apart, if the political state exists as constitution; (2) if the legislature is of a source different
than the executive etc.
The legislature produced the French Revolution. In general, when it has appeared in its special capacity
.is the ruling element, the legislature has produced the great organic, universal revolutions. It has not
attacked the constitution, but a particular antiquated constitution, precisely because the legislature was
the representative of the people, i.e., of the species-will [des Gattungswillens]. The executive, on the
other hand, produced the small, retrograde revolutions, the reactions. It revolted not against an old
constitution in favour of a new one, but against the constitution as such, precisely because the executive
was the representative of the particular will, subjective caprice, the magical part of the will.
Posed correctly, the question is simply this: Does a people have the right to give itself a new
constitution? The answer must be an unqualified 'yes!' because the constitution becomes a practical
illusion the moment it ceases to be a true expression of the people's will.
The collision between the constitution and the legislature is nothing ignore than a conflict of the
constitution with itself, a contradiction in the concept of the constitution.
The constitution is nothing more than an accommodation between the political and non-political state;
hence it is necessarily in itself a treaty between essentially heterogeneous powers. Here, then, it is
impossible for the law to declare that one of these powers, which is a part of the constitution, is to have
the right to modify the constitution itself, which is the whole.
In so far as we speak of the constitution as a particular thing, however, it must be considered a part of the
whole.
In so far as the constitution is understood to be the universal and fundamental determinations of the
rational will, then clearly every people (state) presupposes this and must form it to its political credo.
Actually, this is a matter of knowledge rather than of will. The will of a people can no more exceed the
laws of reason than can the will of an individual. In the case of an irrational people one cannot speak at
all of a rational organisation of the state. In any case, here in the philosophy of right we are concerned
with the species-will.
The legislature does not make the law, it merely discovers and formulates it.
The resolution of this conflict has been attempted by differentiating between assemblée constituante and
assemblée constituée.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (3 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
§ 299. Legislative business (the concerns of the legislature) is more precisely determined in relation to
private individuals, under these two heads: (a) provision by the state for their well being and happiness,
and [b] the exaction of services from them. The former comprises the laws dealing with all sorts of
private rights, the rights of communities, Corporations, and organisations affecting the entire state, and
further it indirectly (see § 298) comprises the whole of the constitution. As for the services to be exacted,
it is only if these are reduced to terms of money, the really existent and universal value of both things and
services, that they can be fixed justly and at the same time in such a way that any particular tasks and
services which an individual may perform come to be mediated through his own arbitrary will.
Concerning this determination of the legislature's business, Hegel himself notes, in the Remark to this
paragraph:
The proper object of universal legislation may be distinguished in a general way from the proper function
of administrative officials or of some kind of state regulation, in that the content of the former is wholly
universal, i.e., determinate laws, while it is what is particular in content which falls to the latter, together
with ways and means of enforcing the law. This distinction, however, is not a hard and fast one, because
a law, by being a law, is ab initio something more than a mere command in general terms (such as 'Thou
shalt not kill'. . . ). A law must in itself be something determinate, but the more determinate it is, the more
readily are its terms capable of being carried out as they stand. At the same time, however, to give to
laws such a fully detailed determinacy would give them empirical features subject inevitably to alteration
in the course of their being actually carried out, and this would contravene their character as laws. The
organic unity of the powers of the state itself implies that it is one single mind which both firmly
establishes the universal and also brings it into its determinate actuality and carries it out.
But it is precisely this organic unity which Hegel has failed to construct. The various powers each have a
different principle, although at the same time they are all equally real. To take refuge from their real
conflict in an imaginary organic unity, instead of developing the various powers as moments of an
organic unity, is therefore an empty, mystical evasion.
The first unresolved collision was that between the constitution as a whole and the legislature. The
second is that between the legislature and the executive, i.e., between the law and its execution.
The second determination found in this paragraph [§ 299] is that the only service the state exacts from
individuals is money.
The reasons Hegel gives for this are:
1. money is the really existent and universal value of both things and services;
2. the services to be exacted can be fixed justly only by means of this reduction;
3. only in this way can the services be fixed in such a way that the particular tasks and services which an
individual may perform conic to be mediated through his own arbitrary will. Hegel notes in the Remark
[to this paragraph]:
ad. 1. In the state it may happen, to begin with, that the numerous aptitudes, possessions, pursuits, and
talents of its members, together with the infinitely varied richness of life intrinsic to these - all of which
are at the same time linked with their owner's mentality - are not subject to direct levy by the state. It lays
claim only to a single form of riches, namely money. (Services requisitioned for the defence of the state
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (4 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
in war arise for the first time in connection with the duty considered in the next sub-division of this
book.) We shall consider personal duty with regard to the military only later - not because of the
following sub-division, but for other reasons. In fact, however, money is not one particular type of wealth
amongst others, but the universal form of all types so far as they are expressed in an external
embodiment and so can be taken as 'things'.
In our day, it continues in the Addition, the state purchases what it requires.
ad 2. Only by being translated into terms of this extreme culmination of externality (sc. wherein riches
are transformed into the externality of existence, in which they can be grasped as an object) can services
exacted by the state be fixed quantitatively and so justly and equitably.
The Addition reads: By means of money, however, the justice of equality can be achieved much more
efficiently. Otherwise, if assessment depended on concrete ability, a talented man would be more heavily
taxed than an untalented one.
ad 3. In Plato's Republic, the Guardians are left to allot individuals to their particular classes and impose
on them their particular tasks ... Under the feudal monarchies the services required from vassals were
equally indeterminate, but they had also to serve in their particular capacity, e.g. as judges. The same
particular character pertains to tasks imposed in the East and in Egypt in connection with colossal
architectural undertakings, and so forth. In these circumstances the principle of subjective freedom is
lacking, i.e., the principle that the individual's substantive activity - which in any case becomes
something particular in content in services like those mentioned - shall be mediated through his particular
volition. This is a right which can be secured only when the demand for service takes the form of a
demand for something of universal value, and it is this right which has brought with it this conversion of
the state's demands into demands for cash.
The Addition reads:
In our day, the state purchases what it requires. This may at first sight seem ail abstract, heartless, and
dead state of affairs, and for the state to be satisfied with indirect services may also look like decadence
in the state. But the principle of the modern state requires that the whole of an individual's activity shall
be mediated through his Will ... But nowadays respect for subjective freedom is publicly recognised
precisely in the fact that the state lays hold of a man only by that which is capable of being held.
Do what you want, pay what you must.
The beginning of the Addition reads:
The two sides of the constitution bear respectively on the rights and the services of individuals. Services
are now almost entirely reduced to money payments, and military service is now almost the only
personal one exacted.
§300. In the legislature as a whole the other powers are the first two moments which are effective, (i) the
monarchy as that to which ultimate decisions belong: (ii) the executive as the advisory body since it is
the moment possessed of [a] a concrete knowledge and oversight of the whole state in its numerous
facets and the actual principles firmly established within it, and [b] a knowledge in particular of what
the state's power needs. The last moment in the legislature is the Estates.
The monarchy and the executive are - the legislature. if, however, the legislature is the whole, then
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (5 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
the monarchy and the executive must accordingly be moments of the legislature. The supervening
Estates are the legislature merely, or the legislature in distinction from the monarchy and the
executive.
§ 301. The Estates have the function of bringing public affairs into existence not only implicitly, but
also actually, i.e., of bringing into existence the moment of subjective formal freedom, the public
consciousness as an empirical universal, of which the thoughts and opinions of the Many are
particulars.
The Estates are civil society's deputation to the state, to which it [i.e., civil society] is opposed as the
'Many'. The Many must for a moment deal consciously with universal affairs as if they were their
own, as objects of public consciousness, which, according to Hegel, is nothing other than the
empirical universal, of which the thoughts and opinions of the Many are particulars. (And in fact,
it is no different in modem or constitutional monarchies.) It is significant that Hegel, who shows
such great respect for the state-mind [dem Staatsgeist] - the ethical spirit, state-consciousness -
absolutely disdains it when it faces him in actual empirical form.
This is the enigma of mysticism. The same fantastic abstraction that rediscovers
state-consciousness in the degenerate form of bureaucracy, a hierarchy of knowledge, and that
uncritically accepts this incomplete existence as the actual and full-valued existence - the same
mystical abstraction admits with equanimity that the actual empirical state-mind, public
consciousness, is a mere potpourri of the 'thoughts and opinions of the Many'. As it imputes to the
bureaucracy an essence which is foreign to it, so it grants to the actuality of that essence only the
inferior form of appearance. Hegel idealises the bureaucracy and empiricises public consciousness.
He can treat actual public consciousness very much à part precisely because he has treated the à
part consciousness as the public consciousness. He need concern himself all the less with the actual
existence of the state-mind in that he believes he has sufficiently realised it in its soi-disant
existences. So long is the state-mind mystically haunted the forecourt it received many plaudits.
Now that we have caught it in persona it is barely respected.
'The Estates have the function of bringing public affairs into existence not only implicitly [an sich],
but also actually [für sich].' And indeed it comes into existence actually as the public consciousness,
as 'an empirical universal, of which the thoughts and opinions of the Many arc particulars'.
The process in which 'public affairs' becomes subject, and thus gains autonomy, is here presented
as a moment of the life-process of public affairs. Instead of having subjects objectifying themselves
in public affairs Hegel has public affairs becoming the subject. Subjects do not need public affairs
as their true affairs, but public affairs needs subjects for its formal existence. It is an affair of
public affairs that it exist also as subject.
Here the difference between the 'being-in-itself' [Ansichsein] and the 'being-for-itself' [Fürsichsein]
of public affairs must be especially considered.
Public affairs already exists 'in-itself' [i.e., implicitly] as the business of the executive etc. Thus,
public affairs exists without actually being public affairs; nothing less, for it is not the affair of civil
society. It has already found its essential existence, its being-in-itself. The fact that public affairs
now actually becomes public consciousness, or empirical universal, is purely formal and, as it were,
only a symbolic coming to actuality. The formal or empirical existence of public affairs is separated
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (6 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
from its substantial existence. The truth of the matter is that public affairs as being-in-itself is not
actually public, and actual empirical public affairs is only formal.
Hegel separates content and form, being-in-itself and being-for-itself, and allows the latter the
superficial status of formal moment. The content is complete and exists in many forms which are
not the forms of this content; while, clearly, the form which is supposed to be the actual form of the
content doesn't have the actual content for its content.
Public affairs is complete without being the actual affairs of the people. The actual affairs of the
people have been established without the activity of the people. The Estates are the illusory
existence of the affairs of the state as being an affair of the people. The illusion is that public affairs
are public affairs, or that truly public affairs are the affair of the people. It has come to the point in
our states as well as in the Hegelian philosophy of right where the tautological sentence, 'The
public affairs are the public affairs', can appear only as an illusion of practical consciousness. The
Estates are the political illusion of civil society. Subjective freedom appears in Hegel as formal
freedom (it is important, however, that what is free be done freely, that freedom doesn't prevail as
an unconscious natural instinct of society), precisely because Hegel has not presented objective
freedom as the actualisation, the activity, of subjective freedom. Because he has given the
presumed or actual content of freedom a mystical bearer, the actual subject of freedom takes on a
formal meaning. The separation of the in-itself and the for-itself, of substance and subject, is
abstract mysticism.
Hegel, in his Remark to § 301 presents the Estates quite rightly as something 'formal' and
'illusory'.
Both the knowledge and the will of the Estates are treated partly as unimportant and partly as
suspect; that is to say, the Estates make no significant contribution.
1. The idea uppermost in men's minds when they speak about the necessity or the expediency of
'summoning the Estates' is generally something of this sort: (i) The deputies of the people, or even
the people themselves, must know best what is in their best interest, - .and (ii) their will for its
promotion is undoubtedly the most disinterested. So far as the first of these points is concerned,
however, the truth is that if 'people' means a particular section of the citizens, then it means
precisely that section which does not know what it wills. To know what one wills, and still more to
know what the absolute will, Reason, wills, is the fruit of profound apprehension (which is found,
no doubt, in the bureaus) and insight, precisely the things which are not popular.
Further along in the paragraph we read the following about the Estates themselves:
The highest civil servants necessarily have a deeper and more comprehensive insight into the
nature of the state's organisation and requirements. They arc also more habituated to the business
of government and have greater skill in it, so that even without the Estates they are able to do what
is best, just as they also continually have to do while the Estates are in session.
And it goes without saying that this is perfectly true in the organisation described by Hegel.
2. As for the conspicuously good will for the general welfare which the Estates are supposed to
possess, it has been pointed out already. . . that to regard the will of the executive as bad, or as less
good [than that of the ruled] is a presupposition characteristic of the rabble or of the negative
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (7 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
outlook generally. This presupposition might at once be answered on its own ground by the
countercharge that the Estates start from isolated individuals, from a private point of view, from
particular interests, and so are inclined to devote their activities to these at the expense of the
general interests, while per contra the other moments in the power of the state explicitly take up the
standpoint of the state from the start and devote themselves to the universal end.
Therefore the knowledge and will of the Estates ire partly superfluous and partly suspect. The
people do not know what they want. III the possession of political knowledge [Staatswssenschaft]
the Estates are not equal to the officials, who have a monopoly on it. The Estates are superfluous
for the execution of public affairs. The officials can carry out this execution without the Estates;
moreover they must, in spite of the Estates, do what is best. Thus the Estates, with regard to their
content, are pure superfluity. Their existence, therefore, is a pure formality in the most literal
sense.
Furthermore, the sentiment of the Estates, their will, is suspect, for they start from the private
point of view and private interests. In truth, private interest is their public affairs, not public
affairs their private interest. But what a way for public affairs to obtain form as public affairs - i.e.,
through a will which doesn't know what it wills, or at least lacks any special knowledge of t he
universal, a will, furthermore, whose actual content is an opposing interest!
In modern states, as in Hegel's Philosophy of Right, the conscious, true actuality of public affairs is
merely formal, or only what is formal constitutes actual public affairs.
Hegel is not to be blamed for depicting the nature of the modern state as it is, but rather for
presenting what is as the essence of the state. The claim that the rational is actual is contradicted
precisely by an irrational actuality, which everywhere is the contrary of what it asserts and asserts
the contrary of what it is.
Instead of showing how public affairs exists for-itself, 'subjectively, and thus actually as such', and
that it also has the form of public affairs, Hegel merely shows that formlessness is its subjectivity;
and a form without content must be formless. The form which public affairs obtains in a state
which is not the state of public affairs can be nothing but a non-form, a self-deceiving,
self-contradicting form, a form which is pure appearance [eine Scheinform] and which will betray
itself as this appearance.
Only for the sake of logic does Hegel want the luxury of the Estates. The being-for-itself of public
affairs as empirical universal must have an existence [ein Dasein]. Hegel does not search for an
adequate actualisation of the being-for-itself of public affairs, but contents himself with finding an
empirical existent which can be dissolved into this logical category. This is the Estates. And Hegel
himself does not fail to note how pitiful and full of contradiction this existent is. Yet he still
reproaches ordinary consciousness for being discontent with this satisfaction of logic, for being
unwilling to see actuality dissolved into logic by this arbitrary abstraction, for wanting logic,
rather, to be transformed into concrete objectivity.
I say arbitrary abstraction, for since the executive power wills, knows, and actualises public affairs,
arises from the people, and is an empirical plurality (Hegel himself tells us that it is not a totality),
why should we not be able to characterise the executive as the 'being-for-itself of public affairs'?
Or, again, why not the Estates as their being-in-itself, since it is only in the executive that [public
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (8 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
affairs] receives illumination, determinacy, execution, and independence?
The true antithesis, however, is this: public affairs must somewhere be represented in the state as
actual, and thus as empirical public affairs; it must appear somewhere in the crown and robes of
the universal, whereby the universal automatically becomes a fiction, an illusion.
Here it is a question of the opposition of the universal as 'form', in the form of universality, and the
universal as 'content'.
In science, for example, an individual can fully perform public affairs, and it is always individuals
who do so. But public affairs become actually public only when they arc no longer the affair of an
individual but of society. This changes not only the form but also the content. In this case, however,
it is a question of the state in which the people itself constitutes the public affairs, a question of the
will which has its true existence as species-will only in the self-conscious will of the people, and,
moreover, a question of the idea of the state.
The modern state, in which public affairs and their pursuit is a monopoly while monopolies are the
actual public affairs, has effected the peculiar device of appropriating public affairs as a pure
form. (in fact, only the form is public affairs.) With that, the modern state has found the
appropriate form for its content, which only appears to be actual public affairs.
The constitutional state is the state in which the state-interest is only formally the actual interest of
the people, but is nevertheless present as a distinct form alongside of the actual state. Here the
state-interest has again received formal actuality as the people's interest; but it is to have only this
formal actuality. It has become ) formality, the haut gout of the life of the people - a ceremony. The
Estates are the sanctioned, legal lie of constitutional states, the lie that the state is the people's
interest or the people the interest of the state. This lie will betray itself in its content. The lie has
established itself as the legislature precisely because the legislature has the universal as its content
and, being more an affair of knowledge than of will, is the metaphysical power of the state;
whereas had the same lie established itself as the executive etc., it would have had either
immediately to dissolve itself or be transformed into a truth. The metaphysical power of the state
was the most likely seat for the metaphysical, universal illusion of the state.
[Remark to § 301.] The Estates are a guarantee of the general welfare and public freedom. A little
reflection will show that this guarantee does not lie in their particular power of insight ... the
guarantee lies on the contrary [a] in the additional (!!) insight of the deputies, insight in the first
place into the activity of such officials as are not immediately under the eye of the higher
functionaries of state, and in particular into the more pressing and more specialised needs and
deficiencies which are directly in their view; [b] in the fact that the anticipation of criticism from
the Many, particularly of public criticism, has the effect of inducing officials to devote their best
attention beforehand to their duties and the schemes under consideration, and to deal with these
only in accordance with the purest motives. This same compulsion is effective also on the members
of the Estates themselves.
As for the general guarantee which is supposed to lie peculiarly in the Estates, each of the other
political institutions shares with the Estates in being a guarantee of public welfare and rational
freedom, and some of these institutions, as for instance the sovereignty of the monarch, hereditary
succession to the throne, the judicial system etc., guarantee these things far more effectively than
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (9 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
the Estates can. Hence the specific function which the concept assigns to the Estates is to be sought
in the fact that in them the subjective moment in universal freedom - the private judgment and
private will of the sphere called 'civil society' in this book - comes into existence integrally related
to the state. This moment is a determination of the Idea once the Idea has developed to totality, a
moment arising as a result of an inner necessity not to be confused with external necessities and
expediencies. The proof of this follows, like all the rest of our account of the state, from adopting
the philosophical point of view.
Public, universal freedom is allegedly guaranteed in the other institutions of the state, while the
Estates constitute its alleged self-guarantee. [But the fact is] that the people rely more heavily on
the Estates, in which the self-assurance of their freedom is thought to be, than on the institutions
which are supposed to assure their freedom independent of their own participation, institutions
which are supposed to be verifications of their freedom without being manifestations of it. The
coordinating function Hegel assigns to the Estates, alongside the other institutions, contradicts the
essence of the Estates.
Hegel solves the problem by finding the 'specific function which the concept assigns to the Estates'
in the fact that in them 'the private judgment and private will ... of civil society... comes into
existence integrally related to the state'. It is the reflection of civil society on the state. just as the
bureaucrats are delegates of the state to civil society, so the Estates are delegates of civil society to
the state. Consequently, it is always a case of transactions of two opposing wills.
What is said in the Addition to this paragraph, namely:
The attitude of the executive to the Estates should not be essentially hostile, and a belief in the
necessity of such hostility is a sad mistake.
is a sad truth.
'The executive is not a party standing over against another party.' Just the contrary.
The taxes voted by the Estates, moreover, are not to be regarded as a present given to the state. On
the contrary they are voted in the best interests of the voters themselves.
Voting for taxes in a constitutional state is, by the very idea of it, necessarily a present.
The real significance of the Estates lies in the fact that it is through them that the state enters the
subjective consciousness of the people and that the people begins to participate in the state.
This last statement is quite correct. In the Estates the people begins to participate in the state, just
as the state enters the people's subjective consciousness as something opposed. But how can Hegel
possibly pass off this beginning as the full reality!
§ 302. Regarded as a mediating organ, the Estates stand between the government in general on the
one hand and the nation broken up into particulars (people and associations) on the other. Their
function requires them to possess a political and administrative sense and temper, no less than a
sense for the interests of individuals and particular groups. At the same time the significance of
their position is that, in common with the organised executive, they are a middle term preventing
both the extreme isolation of the power of the crown, which otherwise might seem a mere arbitrary
tyranny, and also the isolation of particular interests of persons, societies, and Corporations.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (10 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
Further, and more important, they prevent individuals from having the appearance of a mass or
an aggregate and so from acquiring an unorganised opinion and volition and from crystallising
into a powerful bloc in opposition to the organised state.
On the one hand we have the state and the executive, always taken as identical, and on the other
the nation broken up into particulars (people and associations). The Estates stand as a mediating
organ between the two. The Estates are the middle term wherein political and administrative sense
and temper meet and are to be united with the sense and temper of individuals and particular
groups. The identity of these two opposed senses and tempers, in which identity the state was
supposed to actually lie, acquires . a symbolic appearance in the Estates. The transaction between
state and civil society appears as a particular sphere. The Estates are the synthesis between state
and civil society. But how the Estates are to begin to unite in themselves two contradictory tempers
is not indicated. The Estates are the established contradiction of the state and civil society within
the state. At the same time they are the demand for the dissolution of this contradiction.
At the same time the significance of their position is that, in common with the organised executive
they are the middle term etc.
The Estates not only mediate between the people and the executive, but they also prevent the
extreme isolation of the power of the crown, whereby it would appear as mere arbitrary tyranny,
and also the isolation of the particular interests etc. Furthermore they prevent individuals from
having the appearance of a mass or an aggregate. This mediating function is what the Estates have
in common with the organised executive power. In a state in which the position of the Estates
prevents individuals from having the appearance of a mass or an aggregate, and so from acquiring
an unorganised opinion and volition and from crystallising into a powerful bloc in opposition to the
organised state, the organised state exists outside the mass and the aggregate; or, in other words,
the mass and aggregate belong to the organisation of the state. But its unorganised opinion and
volition is to be prevented from crystallising into an opinion and volition in opposition to the state,
through which determinate orientation it would become an organised opinion and volition. At the
same time this powerful bloc is to remain powerful only in such a way that understanding remains
foreign to it, so that the mass is unable to make a move on its own and can only be moved by the
monopolists of the organised state and be exploited as a powerful bloc. Where it is not a matter of
the particular interests of persons, societies and Corporations isolating themselves from the state,
but rather of the individuals being prevented from having the appearance of a mass or an
aggregate and from acquiring an unorganised opinion and volition and from crystallising into a
powerful bloc in opposition to the state, precisely then it becomes evident not that a particular
interest contradicts the state, but rather that the actual organised universal thought of the mass
and aggregate is not the thought of the organised state and cannot find its realisation in the state.
What is it then that makes the Estates appear to be the mediation against this extreme? It is merely
the isolation of the particular interests of persons, societies and Corporations; or the fact that their
isolated interests balance their account with the state through the Estates while, at the same time,
the unorganised opinion and volition of a mass or aggregate employed its volition (its activity) in
creating the Estates and its opinion in judging their activity, and enjoyed the illusion of its own
objectification. The Estates preserve the state from the unorganised aggregate only through the
disorganisation of this very aggregate.
At the same time, however, the mediation of the Estates is to prevent the isolation of the particular
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (11 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
interests of persons, societies and Corporations. This they achieve, first, by coming to an
understanding with the interest of the state and, second, by being themselves the political isolation
of these particular interests, this isolation as political act, in that through them these isolated
interests achieve the rank of the universal.
Finally, the Estates are to mediate against the isolation of the power of the crown as an extreme
(which otherwise might seem a mere arbitrary tyranny). This is correct in so far as the principle of
the power of the crown (arbitrary will) is limited by means of the Estates, at least can operate only
in fetters, and in so far as the Estates themselves become a partaker and accessory of the power of
the crown.
In this way, either the power of the crown ceases to be actually the extreme of the power of the
crown (and the power of the crown exists only as an extreme, a one-sidedness, because it is not an
organic principle) and becomes a mere appearance of power [eine Scheingewalt], a symbol, or else
it loses only the appearance of arbitrary tyranny. The Estates mediate against the isolation of
particular interests by presenting this isolation as a political act. They mediate against the isolation
of the power of the crown as an extreme partly by becoming themselves a part of that power,
partly by making the executive power an extreme.
All the contradictions of modern state-organisations converge in the Estates. They mediate in every
direction because they are, from every direction, the middle term.
It should be noted that Hegel develops the content of the Estates' essential political activity, viz.,
the legislature, less than he does their position, or political rank.
It should be further noted that, while the Estates, according to Hegel, stand between the
government in general on the one hand and the nation broken up into particulars (people and
associations) on the other, the significance of their position as developed above is that, in common
with the organised executive, they are a middle term.
Regarding the first position, the Estates represent the nation over against the executive, but the
nation en miniature. This is their oppositional position.
Regarding the second, they represent the executive over against the nation, but the amplified
executive. This is their conservative position. They are themselves a part of the executive over
against the people, but in such a way that they simultaneously have the significance of representing
the people over against the executive.
Above, Hegel called the legislature a 'totality' (§ 300). In fact, however, the Estates are this totality,
the state within the state; but it is precisely in them that it becomes apparent that the state is not a
totality but a duality. The Estates represent the state in a society that is no state. The state is a mere
representation [eine blosse Vorstellung].
In the Remark Hegel says:
It is one of the most important discoveries of logic that a specific moment, which, by standing in an
opposition, has the position of ail extreme, ceases to be such and is a moment in an organic whole
by being at the same time a mean.
(Thus the Estates are at one and the same time (1) the extreme of the nation over against the
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (12 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
executive, but (2) the mean between nation and executive; or, in other words, the opposition within
the nation itself The opposition between the executive and the nation is mediated through the
opposition between the Estates and the nation. From the point of view of the executive the Estates
have the position of the nation, but from the point of view of the nation they have the position of
the executive. The nation in its occurrence as image, fantasy, illusion, representation - i.e., the
imagined nation, or the Estates, which are immediately situated as a particular power in
dissociation from the actual nation - abolishes [hebt auf] the actual opposition between the nation
and the executive. Here the nation is already dressed out, exactly as required in this particular
organism, so as to have no determinate character.)
The Remark continues:
In connection with our present topic it is all the more important to emphasise this aspect of the
matter because of the popular, but most dangerous, prejudice which regards the Estates
principally from the point of view of their opposition to the executive, as if that were their essential
attitude. If the Estates become an organ in the whole by being taken up into the state, they evince
themselves solely through their mediating function. In this way their opposition to the executive is
reduced to a show. There may indeed be an appearance of opposition between them, but if they
were opposed, not merely superficially, but actually and in substance, then the state would be in
the throes of destruction. That the clash is not of this kind is evident in the nature of the thing,
because the Estates have to deal, not with the essential elements in the organism of the state, but
only with rather specialised and trifling matters, while the passion which even these arouse spends
itself in party cravings in connection with purely subjective interests such as appointments to
higher offices of state.
In the Addition it says: 'The constitution is essentially a system of mediation.'
§ 303. The universal class, or, more precisely, the class of civil servants, must, purely in virtue of its
character as universal, have the universal as the end of its essential activity. In the Estates, as an
element in the legislative power, the unofficial class acquires its political significance and efficacy;
it appears, therefore, in the Estates neither as a mere indiscriminate multitude nor as an aggregate
dispersed into its atoms, but as what it already is, namely a class subdivided into two, one subclass
[the agricultural class] being based on a tic of substance between its members, and the other [the
business class] on particular needs and the work whereby these are met . . . It is only in this way
that there is a genuine link between the particular which is effective in the state and the universal.
Here we have the solution of the riddle. 'In the Estates, as an element in the legislative power, the
unofficial class acquires its political significance.' acquires It is understood that the unofficial, or
private class [der Privatstand] this significance in accordance with what it is, with its articulation
within civil society; (Hegel has already designated the universal class as the class dedicated to the
executive; the universal class, therefore, is represented in the legislature by the executive.)
The Estates are the political significance of the unofficial class, i.e., of the unpolitical class, which is
a contradictio in adjecto; or to put it another way, in class as described by Hegel the unofficial class
(or, more correctly, unofficial class difference) has a political significance. The unofficial class
belongs to the essence, to the very political reality [zur Politik] of this state, which thus gives it also
a political significance, that is, one that differs from its actual significance.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (13 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
In the Remark it says:
This runs counter to another prevalent idea, the idea that since it is in the legislature that the
unofficial class rises to the level of participating in matters of state, it must appear there in the
form of individuals, whether individuals are to choose representatives for this purpose, or whether
every single individual is to have a vote in the legislature himself. This atomistic and abstract point
of view vanishes at the stage of the family, as well as that of civil society where the individual is in
evidence only as a member of a general group. The state, however, is essentially an organisation
each of whose members is in itself a group of this kind, and hence no one of its moments should
appear as an unorganised aggregate. The Many, as units - a congenial interpretation of 'people',
are of course something connected, but they are connected only as an aggregate, a formless mass
whose commotion and activity could therefore only be elementary, irrational, barbarous, and
frightful.
The circles of association in civil society are already communities. To picture these communities as
once more breaking up into a mere conglomeration of individuals as soon as they enter the field of
politics, i.e., the field of the highest concrete universality, is eo ipso to hold civil and political life
apart from one another and as it were to hang the latter in the air, because its basis could then only
be the abstract individuality of caprice and opinion, and hence it would be grounded on chance
and not on what is absolutely stable and justified.
So-called 'theories' of this kind involve the idea that the classes [Stände] of civil society and the
Estates [Stände], which are the 'classes' given a political significance, stand wide apart from each
other. But the German language, by calling them both Stände has still maintained the unity which
in any case they actually possessed in former times.
'The universal class, or, more precisely, the class of civil servants. Hegel proceeds from the
hypothesis that the universal class is the class of civil servants. For him, universal intelligence is
attached permanently to a class.
'In the Estates as an element etc.' Here, the political significance and efficacy of the unofficial class
is precisely its particular significance and efficacy. The unofficial class is not changed into a
political class, but appears as the unofficial class in its political significance and efficacy. It does not
have political significance and efficacy simply; its political efficacy and significance are those of the
unofficial class as unofficial or private. Accordingly, the unofficial class can appear in the political
sphere only in keeping with the class difference found in civil society. The class difference within
civil society becomes a political difference.
Even the German language, says Hegel, expresses the identity of the classes of civil society with the
classes given a political significance; it expresses a unity which in any case they actually possessed
in former times - a unity, one should thus conclude, which no longer exists.
Hegel finds that, in this way there is a genuine link between the particular which is effective in the
state and the universal. In this way the separation of civil and political life is to be abolished and
their identity established.
Hegel finds support in the following: 'The circles of association (family and civil society) are
already communities.' How can one want these to break up into a mere conglomeration of
individuals as soon as they enter the field of politics, i.e., the field of the highest concrete
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (14 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
universality?
It is important to follow this development very carefully.
The peak of Hegelian identity, as Hegel himself admits, was the Middle Ages. There, the classes of
civil society in general and the Estates, or classes given political significance, were identical. The
spirit of the Middle Ages can be expressed thus: the classes of civil society and the political classes
were identical because civil society was political society, because the organic principle of civil
society was the principle of the state.
But Hegel proceeds from the separation of civil society and the political state as two actually
different spheres, firmly opposed to one another. And indeed this separation does actually exist in
the modern state. The identity of the civil and political classes in the Middle Ages was the
expression of the identity of civil and political society. This identity has disappeared; and Hegel
presupposes it as having disappeared. The identity of the civil and political classes, if it expressed
the truth, could be now only an expression of the separation of civil and political society! Or
rather, only the separation of the civil and political classes expresses the true relationship of
modern civil and political society.
Secondly: the political classes Hegel deals with here have a wholly different meaning than those
political classes of the Middle Ages, which are said to be identical with the classes of civil society.
The whole existence of the medieval classes was political; their existence was the existence of the
state. Their legislative activity, their grant of taxes for the realm was merely a particular issue of
their universal political significance and efficacy. Their class was their state. The relationship to
the realm was merely one of transaction between these various states and the nationality, because
the political state in distinction from civil society was nothing but the representation of nationality.
Nationality was the point d'honneur, the kat exhin political sense of these various Corporations etc.,
and taxes etc., pertained only to them. That was the relationship of the legislative classes to the
realm. The classes were related in a similar way within the particular principalities. There, the
principality, the sovereignty was a particular class which enjoyed certain privileges but was
equally inconvenienced by the privileges of the other classes. (With the Greeks, civil society was a
slave to political society.) The universal legislative efficacy of the classes of civil society was in no
way the acquisition of political significance and efficacy by the unofficial, or private class, but was
rather a simple issue of its actual and universal political significance and efficacy. The appearance
of the private class as legislative power was simply a complement of its sovereign and governing
(executive) power; or rather it was its appropriation of wholly public affairs as a private affair, its
acquisition, qua private class, of sovereignty. In the Middle Ages, the classes of civil society were as
such simultaneously legislative because they were not private classes, or because private classes
were political classes. The medieval classes did not, as political Estates, acquire a new character.
They did not become political classes because they participated in legislation; rather they
participated in legislation because they were political classes. But what does that have in common
with Hegel's unofficial class which, as a legislative element, acquires political bravura, an ecstatic
condition, a remarkable, stunning, extraordinary political significance and efficacy?
All the contradictions of the Hegelian presentation are found together in this development.
1. He has presupposed the separation of civil society and the political state (which is a modern
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (15 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
situation), and developed it as a necessary moment of the Idea, as an absolute truth of Reason. He
has presented the political state in its modern form of the separation of the various powers. For its
body he has given the actual acting state the bureaucracy, which he ordains to be the knowing
spirit over and above the materialism of civil society. He has opposed the state, as the actual
universal, to the particular interest and need of civil society. in short, he presents everywhere the
conflict between civil society and the state.
2. He opposes civil society as unofficial, or private class to the political state.
3. He calls the Estates, as element of the legislative power, the pure political formalism of civil
society. He calls them a relationship of civil society to the state which is a reflection of the former
on the latter, a reflection which does not alter the essence of the state. A relationship of reflection is
also the highest identity between essentially different things.
On the other hand:
1. Hegel wants civil society, in its self-establishment as legislative clement, to appear neither as a
mere indiscriminate multitude nor as an aggregate dispersed into its atoms. He wants no
separation of civil and political life.
2. He forgets that he is dealing with a relationship of reflection, and makes the civil classes as such
political classes; but again only with reference to the legislative power, so that their efficacy itself is
proof of the separation.
He makes the Estates the expression of the separation [of civil and political life]; but at the same
time they are supposed to be the representative of an identity - an identity which does not exist.
Hegel is aware of the separation of civil society and the political state, but he wants the unity of the
state expressed within the state; and this is to be achieved by having the classes of civil society,
while remaining such, form the Estates as an element of legislative society. (cf. xiv, x)'
Contents - [1] - [2] - [3] - [4] - [5] - [6] - 1844 Introduction
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch04.htm (16 of 16) [23/08/2000 18:49:18]
Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right
Karl Marx, 1843
§ 304. The Estates, as an element in political life, still retain in their own function the class distinctions
already present in the lower spheres of civil life. The position of the classes is abstract to begin with, i.e.,
in contrast with the whole principle of monarchy or the crown, their position is that of an extreme -
empirical universality. This extreme opposition implies the possibility, though no more, of
harmonisation, and the equally likely possibility of set hostility. This abstract position changes into a
rational relation (into a syllogism, see Remark to § 302) only if the middle term between the opposites
comes into existence. From the point of view of the crown, the executive already has this character (see §
300). So, from the point of view of the classes, one moment in them must be adapted to the task of
existing as in essence the moment of mediation.
§ 305. The principle of one of the classes of civil society is in itself capable of adaptation to this political
position. The class in question is the one whose ethical life is natural, whose basis is family life, and, so
far as its livelihood is concerned, the possession of land. Its particular members attain their position by
birth, just as the monarch does, and, in common with him, they possess a will which rests on itself al6ne.
§ 306. This class is more particularly fitted for political position and significance in that its capital is
independent alike of the state's capital, the uncertainty of business, the quest for profit, and any sort of
fluctuation in possessions. It is likewise independent of favour, whether from the executive or the mob. It
is even fortified against its own wilfulness, because those members of this class who are called to
political life are not entitled, as other citizens are, either to dispose of their entire property at will, or to
the assurance that it will pass to their children, whom they love equally, in similarly equal divisions.
Hence their wealth becomes inalienable, entailed, and burdened by primogeniture.
Addition: This class has a volition of a more independent character. On the whole, the class of
landed-property owners is divided into an educated section and a section of farmers. But over against
both of these sorts of people there stands the business class, which is dependent on needs and
concentrated on their satisfaction, and the civil servant class, which is essentially dependent on the state.
The security and stability of the agricultural class may be still further increased by the institution of
primogeniture, though this institution is desirable only from the point of view of politics, since it entails a
sacrifice for the political end of giving the eldest son a life of independence. Primogeniture is grounded
on the fact that the state should be able to reckon not on the bare possibility of political inclinations, but
on something necessary. Now an inclination for politics is of course not bound up with wealth, but there
is a relatively necessary connection between the two, because a man with independent means is not
hemmed in by external circumstances and so there is nothing to prevent him from entering politics and
working for the state. Where Political institutions are lacking, however, the foundation and
encouragement of primogeniture is nothing but a chain on the freedom of private rights, and either
political meaning must be given to it, or else it will in due course disappear.
§ 307. The right of this section of the agriculture class is thus based in a way on the natural principle of
the family. But this principle is at the same time reversed owing to hard sacrifices made for political
ends, and thereby the activity of this class is essentially directed to those ends. As a consequence of this,
this class is summoned and entitled to its political vocation by birth without the hazards of election. It
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (1 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
therefore has the fixed substantive position between the subjective wilfulness or contingency of both
extremes; and while it mirrors in itself. . . 1 the moment of the monarchical power, it also shares in other
respects the needs and rights of the other extreme [i.e., civil society], and hence it becomes a support at
once of the throne and society.
Hegel has accomplished the masterpiece: he has developed peerage by birthright, wealth by inheritance,
etc. etc., this support of the throne and society, on top of the absolute Idea.
Hegel's keenest insight lies in his sensing the separation of civil and political society to be a
contradiction. But his error is that he contents himself with the appearance of its dissolution, and passes it
off as the real thing; while the 'so-called theories' which he despises demand the separation of the civil
and political classes, and rightly, for they express a consequence of modern society, in that here the
political Estates are precisely nothing but the factual expression of the actual relationship of state and
civil society - their separation.
Hegel has failed to identify the issue in question here. It is the issue of representative versus Estate
constitution. The representative constitution is a great advance, for it is the open, genuine, consistent
expression of the condition of the modern state. It is the unconcealed contradiction.
Before we take up this matter itself, let's take another look at this Hegelian presentation.
In the Estates as an element in the legislative power, the unofficial class acquires its political
significance.
Earlier (in the Remark to § 301) it was said:
Hence the specific function which the concept assigns to the Estates is to be sought in the fact that in
them ... the private judgment and private will of the sphere called 'civil society' in this book come into
existence integrally related to the state.
The meaning of these two, taken in combination, is as follows: Civil society is the unofficial class, or, the
unofficial class is the immediate, essential, concrete class of civil society. Only within the Estates as an
element of the legislative power does it acquire political significance and efficacy. This is a new
endowment, a particular function, for precisely its character as unofficial class expresses its opposition to
political significance and efficacy, the privation of political character, and the fact that civil society
actually lacks political significance and efficacy. The unofficial class is the class of civil society, or civil
society is the unofficial class. Thus, in consequence, Hegel also excludes the universal class from the
Estates as an element of the legislative power:
The universal class, or, more precisely, the class of civil servants, must purely in virtue of its character as
universal, have the universal as the end of its essential activity.
In virtue of its character, civil society, or the unofficial class, does not have the universal as the end of its
essential activity. Its essential activity is not a determination of the universal; it has no universal
character. The unofficial class is the class of civil society as opposed to the [political] class.' The class of
civil society is not a political class.
In declaring civil society to be the unofficial class, Hegel has declared the class differences of civil
society to be non-political differences and civil and political life to be heterogeneous in character, even
antitheses. How then does he proceed?
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (2 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
[The unofficial class] appears, therefore, in the Estates neither as a mere indiscriminate multitude nor as
an aggregate dispersed into its atoms, but as what it already is, namely a class subdivided into two, one
sub-class [the agricultural class] being based on a tie of substance between its members, and the other
[the business class] on particular needs and the work whereby these are met (see § 201 ff.). It is only in
this way that there is a genuine link between the particular which is effective in the state and the
universal.
To be sure, civil society (the unofficial class), in its legislative activity in the Estates, cannot appear as a
mere indiscriminate multitude because the mere indiscriminate multitude exists only in imagination or
fantasy, but not in actuality. What actually exists is only accidental multitudes of various sizes (cities,
villages, etc.). These multitudes, or this aggregate not only appears but everywhere really is an aggregate
dispersed into its atoms; and when it appears in its political-class activity it must appear as this atomistic
thing. The unofficial class, civil society, cannot appear here as what it already is. For what is it already?
Unofficial class, i.e., opposition to and separation from the state. In order to achieve political significance
and efficacy it must rather renounce itself as what it already is, as unofficial class. Only through this does
it acquire its political significance and efficacy. This political act is a complete transubstantiation. In this
political act civil society must completely renounce itself as such, as unofficial class, and assert a part of
its essence which not only has nothing in common with the actual civil existence of its essence, but
directly opposes it.
What the universal law is appears here in the individual. Civil society and the state are separated.
Consequently the citizen of the state and the member of civil society are also separated. The individual
must thus undertake an essential schism within himself As actual citizen he finds himself in a two-fold
organisation: [a] the bureaucratic, which is an external formal determination of the otherworldly state, of
the executive power, which does not touch him and his independent actuality; [b] the social, the
organisation of civil society, within which he stands outside the state as a private man, for civil society
does not touch upon the political state as such. The former [the bureaucratic] is an organisation of the
state to which he continually contributes the material. The latter [the social] is a civil organisation whose
material is not the state. In the former the state relates to him as formal opposition; in the latter he
himself relates to the state as material opposition. Thus, in order to behave as actual citizen of the state,
to acquire political significance and efficacy, he must abandon his civil actuality, abstract from it, and
retire from this entire organisation into his individuality. He must do this because the only existence that
he finds for his state-citizenship is his pure, bare individuality, for the existence of the state as executive
is complete without him, and his existence in civil society is complete without the state. Only in
opposition to these exclusively existing communities, only as an individual, can he be a citizen of the
state. His existence as citizen is an existence lying outside the realm of his communal existences, and is
hence purely individual. The legislature as a power is precisely the organisation, the communal
embodiment, which his political existence is supposed to receive. Prior to the legislature, civil society, or
the unofficial class, does not exist as political organisation. In order that it come to existence as such, its
actual organisation, actual civil life, must be established as non-existing, for the Estates as an element of
the legislative power have precisely the character of rendering the unofficial class, civil society,
non-existent. The separation of civil society and the political state appears necessarily to be a separation
of the political citizen, the citizen of the state, from civil society, i.e., from his own actual, empirical
reality; for as a state-idealist he is a being who is completely other, distinct, different from and opposed
to his own actuality. Here civil society effects within itself the relationship of the state and civil society, a
relationship which already exists on the other side [i.e., within the state] as the bureaucracy. in the
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (3 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
Estates the universal becomes actually, explicitly [für sich] what it is implicitly [an sich], namely,
opposition to the particular. The citizen must renounce his class, civil society, the unofficial class, in
order to achieve political significance and efficacy; for it is precisely this class which stands between the
individual and the political state.
If Hegel already contrasts the whole of civil society as unofficial class to the political state, then it is
self-evident that the distinctions within the unofficial class, i.e., the various civil classes, have only an
unofficial significance with regard to the state; in other words, they have no political significance. For the
various civil classes are simply the actualisation, the existence, of the principle, i.e., of the unofficial
class as of the principle of civil society. If, however, the principle must be abandoned, then it is
self-evident that still more the schisms within this principle are non-existent for the political state.
'It is only in this way', says Hegel in concluding the paragraph, 'that there is a genuine link between the
particular which is effective in the state and the universal.' But here Hegel confuses the state as the whole
of a people's existence with the political state. That particular is not the particular in, but rather outside
the state, namely, the political state. It is not only not the particular which is effective in the state, but
also the ineffectiveness [Unwirklichkeit] of the state. What Hegel wants to establish is that the classes of
civil society are political classes; and in order to prove this he asserts that the classes of civil society are
the particularity of the political state, that is to say, that civil society is political society. The expression,
'The particular in the state', can here only mean the particularity of the state. A bad conscience causes
Hegel to choose the vague expression. Not only has he himself developed just the opposite, but he even
ratifies it in this paragraph by characterising civil society as the 'unofficial class'. His statement that the
particular is 'linked' to the universal is very cautious. The most dissimilar things can be linked. But here
we are not dealing with a gradual transition but with a transubstantiation, and it is useless to ignore
deliberately this cleft which has been jumped over and yet manifested by the very jump.
In the Remark Hegel says: 'This runs counter to another prevalent idea' etc. We have just shown how this
prevalent idea is consequently and inevitably a necessary idea of the people's present development, and
how Hegel's idea, despite its also being very prevalent in certain circles, is nevertheless untrue.
Returning to this prevalent idea Hegel says: 'This atomistic and abstract point of view vanishes at the
stage of the family' etc. etc. 'The state, however, is' etc. This point of view is undeniably abstract, but it is
the abstraction of the political state as Hegel himself develops it. It is atomistic too, but it is the atomism
of society itself. The point of view cannot be concrete when the object of the point of view is abstract.
The atomism into which civil society is driven by its political act results necessarily from the fact that the
commonwealth [das Gemeinwesen], the communal being [das kommunistische Wesen], within which the
individual exists, is [reduced to] civil society separated from the state, or in other words, that the political
state is an abstraction of civil society.'
This atomistic point of view, although it already vanishes in the family, and perhaps (??) also in civil
society, recurs in the political state precisely because the political state is an abstraction of the family and
civil society. But the reverse is also true. By expressing the strangeness [das Befremdliche] of this
occurrence Hegel has not eliminated the estrangement [die Entfremdung].
The circles of association in civil society, Hegel continues, are already communities. To picture these
communities as once more breaking up into a mere conglomeration of individuals as soon as they enter
the field of politics, i.e., the field of the highest concrete universality, is eo ipso to hold civil and political
life apart from one another and as it were to hang the latter in the air, because its basis could then only be
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (4 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
the abstract individuality of caprice and opinion, and hence it would be grounded on chance and not on
what is absolutely stable and justified.
This picturing [of these communities as breaking up] does not hold civil and political life apart; it is
simply the picturing of an actually existing separation.
Nor does this picturing hang political life in the air; rather, political life is the life in the air, the ethereal
region of civil society.
Now we turn to the representative and the Estate systems.
It is a development of history that has transformed the political classes into social classes such that, just
as the Christians are equal in heaven yet unequal on earth, so the individual members of a people are
equal in the heaven of their political world yet unequal in the earthly existence of society. The real
transformation of the political classes into civil classes took place under the absolute monarchy. The
bureaucracy asserted the idea of unity over against the various states within the state. Nevertheless, even
alongside the bureaucracy of the absolute executive, the social difference of the classes remained a
political difference, political within and alongside the bureaucracy of the absolute executive. Only the
French Revolution completed the transformation of the political classes into social classes, in other
words, made the class distinctions of civil society into merely social distinctions, pertaining to private
life but meaningless in political life. With that, the separation of political life and civil society was
completed.
At the same time the classes of civil society were likewise transformed: civil society underwent a change
by reason of its separation from political society. Class in the medieval sense remained only within the
bureaucracy itself, where civil and political positions are immediately identical. Over against this stands
civil society as unofficial class. Here class distinction is no longer one of need and of labor as an
independent body. The sole general, superficial and formal distinction which remains is that of town and
country. But within civil society itself the distinctions take shape in changeable, unfixed spheres whose
principle is arbitrariness. Money and education are the prevalent criteria. Yet it's not here, but in the
critique of Hegel's treatment of civil society that this should be developed. Enough said. Class in civil
society has neither need - and therefore a natural impulse - nor politics for its principle. It is a division of
the masses whose development is unstable and whose very structure is arbitrary and in no sense an
organisation.
The sole characteristic thing is that the lack of property, and the class in need of immediate labor, of
concrete labor, forms less a class of civil society than the basis upon which the spheres of civil society
rest and move. The sole class in which political and civil positions coincide is that of the members of the
executive power. The present social class already manifests a distinction from the former class of civil
society by the fact that it does not, as was formerly the case, regard the ' dividual as a communal in
individual, as a communal being [ein Gemeinwesen]; rather, it is partly chance, partly labor, etc., of the
individual which determines whether he remains in his class or not, a class which is, further, only an
external determination of this individual; for he neither inheres in his work nor does the class relate to
him as an objective communal being organised according to firm laws and related firmly to him.
Moreover, he stands in no actual relation to his substantial activity, to his actual class. The medical man,
for instance, forms no particular class in civil society. one businessman belongs to a class different than
that of another businessman, i.e., he belongs to another social position. Just as civil society is separated
from political society, so within itself civil society is separated into class and social position, even though
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (5 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
some relations obtain between the two. The principle of the civil class, or of civil society, is enjoyment
and the capacity to enjoy. In his political role the member of civil society rids himself of his class, of his
actual private position; by this alone does he acquire significance as man. in other words, his character as
a member of the state, as a social being, appears to be his human character. For all of his other
characteristics in civil society appear to be unessential to the man, the individual; that is, they appear to
be external characteristics which are indeed necessary to his existence within the whole, i.e., as being a
bond with the whole, but a bond that he can just as well throw off. (Present civil society is the
accomplished principle of individualism: individual existence is the final end, while activity, labor,
content, etc., are merely means.)
The Estate-constitution, when not a tradition of the Middle Ages, is the attempt, partly within the
political sphere itself, to thrust man back into the limitation of his private sphere, to make his
particularity his substantial consciousness and, by means of the political character of class difference,
also to make him once more into a social being.
The actual man is the private man of the present-day political constitution.
In general, the significance of the estate is that it makes difference, separation, subsistence, things
pertaining to the individual as such.' His manner of life, activity, etc. is his privilege, and instead of
making him a functional member of society, it makes him an exception from society. The fact that this
difference is not only individual but also established as community, estate, corporation, not only fails to
abolish the exclusiveness of its nature, but is rather its expression. Instead of the particular function being
a function of society, the particular function is made into a society for itself.
Not only is the estate based on the separation of society as the governing principle, but it separates man
from his universal nature; it makes him an animal whose being coincides immediately with its
determinate character. The Middle Ages constitutes the animal history of mankind, its zoology.
Modern times, civilisation, commits the opposite mistake. It separates man s objective essence from him,
taking it to be merely external and material. Man's content is not taken to be his true actuality.
Anything further regarding this is to be developed in the section on 'Civil Society'.
Now we come to
§ 304. The Estates, as an element in political life, still retain in their own significance2 the class
distinctions already present in the lower spheres of civil life.
We have already shown that the class distinctions already present in the lower spheres of life have no
significance for the political spheres, or if so, then only the significance of private, hence non-political,
distinctions. But according to Hegel here they do not even have their already present significance (their
significance in civil society). Rather, the Estates as an element in political life affirms its essence by
embodying these distinctions within itself; and, thus immersed in political life, they receive a
significance of their 'own' which belongs not to them but to this element.
As long as the organisation of civil society remained political, and the political state and civil society
were one, this separation, this duplication of the estates' significance was not present. The estates did not
signify one thing in the civil world and something other in the political world. They acquired no
[additional] significance in the political world, but signified only themselves. The duality of civil society
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (6 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
and the political state, which the Estate-constitution purports to resolve through a reminiscence, appears
within that constitution itself, in that class difference (the differentiation within civil society) acquires in
the political sphere a significance different than in the civil sphere. There is apparent identity here: the
same subject, but in an essentially different determination, and thus in fact a double subject. And this
illusory identity (surely an illusory identity because, in fact, the actual subject, man, remains constantly
himself, does not lose his identity in the various determinations of his being; but here man is not the
subject, rather he is identified with a predicate - the class - and at the same time it is asserted that he
exists in this definite determination and in another determination, that he is, as this definite, exempted
and restricted thing, something other than this restricted thing) is artificially maintained through that
reflection [mentioned earlier], by at one time having civil class distinction as such assume a character
which should accrue to it only in the political sphere, and at another time reversing things and having the
class distinction in the political sphere acquire a character which issues not from the political sphere but
from the subject of the civil sphere. In order to present the one limited subject, the definite class (the
class distinction), as the essential subject of both predicates, or in order to prove the identity of the two
predicates, both are mystified and developed in an illusory and vague dimorphism [Doppelgestalt].
Here the same subject is taken in different meanings, but the meaning is not a self-determination [of the
subject]; rather, it is an allegorical determination foisted on the subject. One could use the same meaning
for a different concrete subject, or another meaning for the same subject. The significance that civil class
distinction acquires in the political sphere is not its own, but proceeds from the political sphere; and even
here it could have a different significance, as was historically the case. The reverse is also true. This is
the uncritical, the mystical way of interpreting an old world-view in terms of a new one, through which it
becomes nothing but an unhappy hybrid in which the form betrays the meaning and the meaning the
form, and neither does the form achieve significance, thus becoming actual form, nor the significance
become form, thus becoming actual significance. This uncritical spirit, this mysticism, is the enigma of
the modern constitution (kat exohin the Estate-constitution) as well as the mystery of Hegelian
philosophy, especially the Philosophy of Right and the Philosophy of Religion.
The best way to rid oneself of this illusion is to take the significance as what it is, i.e., as the actual
determination, then as such make it the subject, and consider whether its ostensibly proper subject is its
actual predicate, i.e., whether this ostensibly proper subject expresses its [the actual determination's]
essence and true actualisation.
The position of the classes (the Estates as an element in political life), is abstract to begin with, i.e., in
contrast with the whole principle of monarchy or the crown, their position is that of an extreme -
empirical universality. This extreme opposition implies the possibility, though no more, of
harmonisation, and the equally likely possibility of set hostility. This abstract position changes into a
rational relation (into a syllogism, see Remark to § 302) only if the middle term between the opposites
comes into existence.
We have already seen that the Estates, in common with the executive power, form the middle term
between the principle of monarchy and the people, between the will of the state existing as one and as
many empirical Wills, and between empirical singularity and empirical universality. just as he had to
define the will of civil society as empirical universality, so Hegel had to define the sovereign will as
empirical singularity; but he does not articulate the antithesis in all of its sharpness.
Hegel continues:
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (7 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
From the point of view of the crown, the executive already has this character (see § 300). So, from the
point of view of the classes, one moment in them must be adapted to the task of existing as in essence the
moment of mediation.
The true antitheses, however, are the sovereign and civil society. And as we have already seen, the
Estates have the same significance from the people's point of view as the executive has from the point of
view of the sovereign. just as the executive emanates in an elaborate circular system, so the people
condenses into a miniature edition; for the constitutional monarchy can get along well only with the
people en miniature. The Estates, from the point of view of civil society, are the very same abstraction of
the political state as is the executive from the sovereign's point of view. Thus it appears that the
mediation has been fully achieved. Both extremes have left their obstinacy behind, each has imparted the
spirit of its particular essence into a fusion with that of the other; and the legislature, whose elements are
the executive as well as the Estates, appears not to be that which must first allow this mediation to come
to existence, but to be itself the already existing mediation. Also, Hegel has already [§ 302] declared the
Estates in common with the executive to be the middle term between the people and the sovereign (the
same way the Estates are the middle term between civil society and the executive, etc.). Thus the rational
relation, the syllogism, appears to be complete. The legislature, the middle term, is a mixtum compositum
of both extremes: the sovereign-principle and civil society, empirical singularity and empirical
universality, subject and predicate. In general, Hegel conceives of the syllogism as middle term, to be a
mixtum compositum. We can say that in his development of the rational syllogism all of the
transcendence and mystical dualism of his system becomes apparent. The middle term is the wooden
sword, the concealed opposition between universality and singularity.
To begin with, we notice in regard to this whole development that the mediation Hegel wants to establish
here is not derived from the essence of the legislature, from its own character, but rather with regard to
an existence lying outside its essential character. It is a construction of reference. The legislature is
chiefly developed with regard only to a third [party]. Hence, it is primarily the construction of its formal
existence which receives all the attention. The legislature is constructed very diplomatically. This results
from the false, illusory kat exohin political position given to the legislature in the modern state (whose
interpreter is Hegel himself). What follows immediately is that this is no true state, because in it the
determinate functions of the state, one of which is the legislature, must not be regarded in and for
themselves, not theoretically, but rather practically; they must not be regarded as independent powers,
but as powers bound up with an opposite, and this in accordance with the rules of convention rather than
by the nature of things.
Thus the Estates, in common with the executive, should actually be the middle term between the will of
empirical singularity, i.e., the sovereign, and the will of empirical universality, i.e., civil society. But in
fact their position is really 'abstract to begin with, i.e., in contrast with the whole principle of monarchy
or the crown, their position is that of an extreme empirical universality. This extreme opposition implies
the possibility, though no more, of harmonisation, and the equally likely possibility of set hostility. In
other words their position, as Hegel quite rightly remarks, is an abstract position.
It appears at first that neither the extreme of empirical universality nor the principle of monarchy or the
crown, i.e., the extreme of empirical singularity, are opposed to one another. For from the point of view
of civil society the Estates are delegated just as the executive is from the point of view of the sovereign.
just as the principle of the crown ceases, in the delegated executive power, to be the extreme of empirical
singularity, surrendering its self-determined will and lowering itself to the finitude of knowledge,
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (8 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
responsibility, and thought, so civil society appears in the Estates to be no longer an empirical
universality, but a very definite whole which has political and administrative sense and temper, and no
less a sense for the interests of individuals and particular groups (§ 302). Civil society, in its miniature
edition as the Estates, has ceased to be empirical universality. Rather, it has been reduced to a delegated
committee of very definite number. If the sovereign assumes empirical universality in the executive
power, then civil society assumes empirical singularity or particularity in the Estates. Both have become
a particular.
The only opposition which remains possible appears to be that between the two emanations, between the
executive- and the Estate-elements within the legislature. It appears, therefore, to be an opposition within
the legislature itself. And these elements which mediate 'in common' seem quite prone to get into one
another's hair. In the executive element of the legislature the inaccessible empirical singularity of the
sovereign has come down to earth in a number of limited, tangible, responsible personalities; and in the
Estates, civil society has exalted itself into a number of political men. Both sides have lost their
inaccessibility. The crown - the inaccessible, exclusive, empirical One - has lost its obstinacy, while civil
society - the inaccessible, vague, empirical All - has lost its fluidity. In the Estates on the one hand, and
the executive element of the legislature on the other, which together would mediate between civil society
and the sovereign, the opposition thus appears to have become, first of all, a refereed opposition, but also
an irreconcilable contradiction.
As for this mediation, it is therefore, as Hegel rightly argues, all the more necessary that the middle term
between the opposites comes into existence; for it is itself much more the existence of the contradiction
than of the mediation.
That this mediation will be effected by the Estates seems to be maintained by Hegel without any
foundation. He says:
From the point of view of the crown, the executive already has this character (see § 300). So, from the
point of view of the classes, one moment in them must be adapted to the task of existing as in essence the
moment of mediation.
But we have already seen that Hegel arbitrarily and inconsistently posits the sovereign and the Estates as
opposed extremes. As the executive has this character from the point of view of the crown, so the Estates
have it from the point of view of civil society. Not only do [the Estates] stand, in common with the
executive, between the sovereign and civil society, but also between the executive in general and the
people (§ 302). They do more on behalf of civil society than the executive does on behalf of the crown,
which is itself in opposition to the people. Thus they have accomplished their full measure of mediation.
Why make these asses bear still more? Why should they always be made the donkey-bridge, even
between themselves and their own adversaries? Why must they always perform the self-sacrifice? Should
they cut off one of their hands when both are needed to withstand their adversary, the executive element
of the legislature?
In addition, Hegel first has the Estates arise from the Corporations, class distinctions, etc., lest they be a
mere empirical universality; and now he reverses the process, and makes them mere empirical
universality in order to have class distinction arise from them! just as the sovereign is mediated with civil
society through the executive, so society is mediated with the executive through the Estates - the
executive thus acting as society's Christ, and the Estates as its priests.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (9 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
Now it appears all the more that the role of the extremes - the crown (empirical singularity) and civil
society (empirical universality) - must be that of mediating as the middle term between the opposites; all
the more because 'it is one of the most important discoveries of logic that a specific moment which, by
standing in an opposition, has the position of an extreme, ceases to be such and is a moment in an organic
whole by being at the same time the mean' (Remark to § 302). Civil society appears to be unable to play
this role, for civil society as itself, as an extreme, occupies no seat in the legislature. The other extreme,
the sovereign principle, exists as an extreme within the legislature, and thus apparently must be the
mediator between the Estate- and the executive-elements. And it appears to have all the qualifications;
for, on the one hand, the whole of the state, and therefore also civil society, is represented within it, and,
more specifically, it has empirical singularity of will in common with the Estates, since empirical
universality is actual only as empirical singularity. Furthermore, the sovereign principle does not merely
op pose civil society as a kind of formula, as state-consciousness, the way the executive does. It is itself
the state; it has the material, natural moment in common with civil society. On the other hand, it is the
head and the representative of the executive. (Hegel, who inverts everything, makes the executive the
representative, the emanation, of the sovereign. When he considers the idea whose existence the
sovereign is supposed to be, Hegel has in mind not the actual idea of the executive, the executive as idea,
but rather the subject of the Absolute Idea which exists corporeally in the sovereign; hence the executive
becomes a mystical continuation of the soul existing in his body - the sovereign body.)
The sovereign, then, had to be the middle term in the legislature between the executive and the Estates;
but, of course, the executive is the middle term between him and the Estates, and the Estates between
him and civil society. How is he to mediate between what he himself needs as a mean lest his own
existence become a one-sided extreme? Now the complete absurdity of these extremes, which
interchangeably play now the part of the extreme and now the part of the mean, becomes apparent. They
are like Janus with two-faced heads, which now show themselves from the front and now from the back,
with a diverse character at either side. What was first intended to be the mean between two extremes now
itself occurs as an extreme; and the other of the two extremes, which had just been mediated by it, now
intervenes as an extreme' (because of its distinction from the other extreme) between its extreme and its
mean. This is a kind of mutual reconciliation society. It is as if a man stepped between two opponents,
only to have one of them immediately step between the mediator and the other opponent. It is like the
story of the man and wife who quarrelled and the doctor who wished to mediate between them,
whereupon the wife soon had to step between the doctor and her husband, and then the husband between
his wife and the doctor. It is like the lion in A Midsummer Night's Dream who exclaims: 'I am the lion,
and I am not the lion, but Snug.' So here each extreme is sometimes the lion of opposition and sometimes
the Snug of mediation. When the one extreme cries: 'Now I am the mean', then the other two may not
touch it, but rather only swing at the one that was just the extreme. As one can see, this is a society
pugnacious at heart but too afraid of bruises to ever really fight. The two who want to fight arrange it so
that the third who steps between them will get the beating, but immediately one of the two appears as the
third, and because of all this caution they never arrive at a decision. We find this system of mediation in
effect also where the very man who wishes to beat an opponent has at the same time to protect him from
a beating at the hands of other opponents, and because of this double pursuit never manages to execute
his own business. It is remarkable that Hegel, who reduces this absurdity of mediation to its abstract
logical, and hence pure and irreducible, expression, calls it at the same time the speculative mystery of
logic, the rational relationship, the rational syllogism. Actual extremes cannot be mediated with each
other precisely because they are actual extremes. But neither are they in need of mediation, because they
are opposed in essence. They have nothing in common with one another; they neither need nor
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (10 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
complement one another. The one does not carry in its womb the yearning, the need, the anticipation of
the other. (When Hegel treats universality and singularity, the abstract moments of the syllogism, as
actual opposites, this is precisely the fundamental dualism of his logic. Anything further regarding this
belongs in the critique of Hegelian logic.)
This appears to be in opposition to the principle: Les extrêmes se touchent. The North and South Poles
attract each other; the female and male sexes also attract each other, and only through the union of their
extreme differences does man result.
On the other hand, each extreme is its other extreme. Abstract spiritualism is abstract materialism;
abstract materialism is the abstract spiritualism of matter.
In regard to the former, both North and South Poles are poles; their essence is identical. In the same way
both female and male gender are of one species, one nature, i.e., human nature. North and South Poles
are opposed determinations of one essence, the variation of one essence brought to its highest degree of
development. They are the differentiated essence. They are what they are only as differentiated
determinations; that is, each is this differentiated determination of the one same essence. Truly in real
extremes would be Pole and non-Pole, human and non-human gender. Difference here is one of
existence, whereas there [i.e., in the case of Pole and non-Pole, etc.,] difference is one of essence, i.e., the
difference between two essences. in regard to the second [i.e. where each extreme is its other extreme],
the chief characteristic lies in the fact that a concept (existence, etc.) is taken abstractly, and that it does
not have significance as independent but rather as an abstraction from another, and only as this
abstraction. Thus, for example, spirit is only the abstraction from matter. It is evident that precisely
because this form is to be the content of the concept, its real essence is rather the abstract opposite, i.e.,
the object from which it abstracts taken in its abstraction - in this case, abstract materialism.
Had the difference within the existence of one essence not been confused, in part, with the abstraction
given independence (an abstraction not from another, of course, but from itself) and, in part, with the
actual opposition of mutually exclusive essences, then a three-fold error could have been avoided,
namely:
1. that because only the extreme is true, every abstraction and one-sidedness takes itself to be the truth,
whereby a principle appears to be only an abstraction from another instead of a totality in itself;
2. that the decisiveness of actual opposites, their formation into extremes, which is nothing other than
their self-knowledge as well as their inflammation to the decision to fight, is thought to be something
which should be prevented if possible, in other words, something harmful;
3. that their mediation is attempted. For no matter how firmly both extremes appear, in their existence, to
be actual and to be extremes, it still lies only in the essence of the one to be an extreme, and it does not
have for the other the meaning of true actuality.
The one infringes upon the other, but they do not occupy a common position. For example, Christianity,
or religion in general, and philosophy are extremes. But in fact religion is not a true opposite to
philosophy, for philosophy comprehends religion in its illusory actuality. Thus, for philosophy - in so far
as it seeks to be an actuality - religion is dissolved in itself. There is no actual duality of essence. More
on this later.
The question arises, why does Hegel need a new mediation on the side of the Estates at all? Or does he
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (11 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
share with [others] I 'the popular, but not dangerous prejudice, which regards the Estates principally from
the point of view of their opposition to the executive, as if that were their essential attitude'? (Remark to
§ 302.)
The fact of the matter is simply this: On the one hand we have seen that it is only in the legislature that
civil society as the element of the Estates, and the power of the crown as the element of the executive
have taken on the spirit of actual, immediately practical opposition.
On the other hand, the legislature is the totality. In it we find (1) the deputation of the sovereign
principle, i.e., the executive; (2) the deputation of civil society, i.e., the Estates; but in addition, (3) the
one extreme as such, i.e., the sovereign principle; while the other extreme, civil society, does not exist in
it as such. It is only because of this that the Estates become the extreme to the sovereign principle, when
civil society really should be. As we have seen, only as Estates does civil society organise itself into a
political existence. The Estates are its political existence, its transubstantiation into the political state.
Again as we have seen, only the legislature is, therefore, the actual political state in its totality. Here,
then, there is (1) sovereign principle, (2) executive, (3) civil society. The Estates are the civil society of
the political state, i.e., the legislature. The extreme to the sovereign, which civil society was supposed to
have been, is therefore the Estates. (Because civil society is the non-actuality of political existence, the
political existence of civil society is its own dissolution, its separation from itself.) Therefore it also
constitutes an opposition to t executive.
Hegel, therefore, again designates the Estates as the extreme of empirical universality, which is actually
civil society itself. (Hence he unnecessarily allows the Estates, as an element in political life, to proceed
from the Corporations and different classes. This procedure would make sense only if the distinct classes
as such were in fact the legislative classes, if, accordingly, the distinction of civil society - i.e., its civil
character - were re vera the political character. We would then not have a legislature of the state as a
whole, but rather a legislature of the various estates, Corporations, and classes over the state as a whole.
The estates [or classes] of civil society would receive no political character, but would rather determine
the political state. They would make their particularity a power determining the whole. They would be
the power of the particular over the universal. And we would not have one legislature, but several, which
would come to terms among themselves and with the executive. However, Hegel has in mind the Estates
in the modern sense, namely the actualisation of state citizenship, or of the Bourgeois. He does not want
the actual universal, the political state, to be determined by civil society, but rather civil society to be
determined by the state. Thus while he accepts the Estates in their medieval form, he gives them the
opposite significance, namely, that of being determined by the political state. The Estates as
representatives of the Corporations, etc., would not be empirical universality, but rather empirical
particularity, i.e., the particularity of the empirical!) The legislature, therefore, needs mediation within
itself, that is to say, a concealment of the opposition. And this mediation must come from the Estates
because in the legislature the Estates lose their significance of being the representation of civil society
and become the primary element, the very civil society of the legislature. The legislature is the totality of
the political state and, precisely because of this, the contradiction of the political state brought forcibly to
appearance. Thus it is also its established dissolution. Entirely different principles collide within it. To be
sure, it appears to be the opposition between the two elements, that of the sovereign principle and that of
the Estates, and so forth. But in fact it is the antinomy of political state and civil society, the
self-contradiction of the abstract political state. The legislature is the established revolt. (Hegel's chief
mistake consists in the fact that he conceives of the contradiction in appearance as being a unity in
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (12 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
essence, i.e., in the Idea; whereas it certainly has something more profound in its essence, namely, an
essential contradiction. For example here, the contradiction in the legislature itself is nothing other than
the contradiction of the political state, and thus also the self-contradiction of civil society.
Vulgar criticism falls into an opposite dogmatic error. Thus, for example, it criticises the constitution,
drawing attention to the opposition Of the powers etc. It finds contradictions everywhere. But criticism
that struggles with its opposite remains dogmatic criticism, as for example in earlier times, when the
dogma of the Blessed Trinity was set aside by appealing to the contradiction between 1 and 3. True
criticism, however, shows the internal genesis of the Blessed Trinity in the human mind. it describes the
act of its birth. Thus, true philosophical criticism of the present state constitution not only shows the
contradictions as existing, but clarifies them, grasps their essence and necessity. It comprehends their
own proper significance. However, this comprehension does not, as Hegel thinks, consist in everywhere
recognising the determinations of the logical concept, but rather in grasping the proper logic of the
proper object.)
As Hegel expresses it, the position of the political Estates relative to the sovereign implies the possibility,
though no more, of harmonisation, and the equally likely possibility of set hostility.
The possibility of hostility is implied everywhere different volitions meet. Hegel himself says that the
possibility of harmonisation is the possibility of hostility. Thus, he must now construct an element which
is both the impossibility of hostility and the actuality of harmonisation. For him, such an element would
be the freedom of decision and thought in face of the sovereign will and the executive. Thus it would no
longer be an element belonging to the Estates as an element in political life. Rather, it would be an
element of the sovereign will and the executive, and would stand in the same opposition to the actual
Estates as does the executive itself
This demand is already quite muted by the conclusion of the paragraph:
From the point of view of the crown, the executive already has this character (see § 300). So, from the
point of view of the classes, one moment in them must be adapted to the task of existing as in essence the
moment of mediation.
The moment which is dispatched from the estates [or classes] must have a character the reverse of that
which the executive has from the point of view of the sovereign, since the sovereign and the estates are
opposite extremes. just as the sovereign democratises himself in the executive, so this estate element
must monarchise itself in its deputation. Thus what Hegel wants is a moment of sovereignty issuing from
the estates. just as the executive has an estate-moment on behalf of the sovereign, so there should also be
a sovereign-moment on behalf of the estates.
The actuality of harmonisation and the impossibility of hostility converts into the following demand: 'So,
from the point of view of the classes, one moment in them must be adapted to the task of existing as in
essence the moment of mediation.' Adapted to the task! According to § 302 the Estates as a whole have
this task. It should not say 'task' but rather 'certainty'. And what kind of task is this anyway which exists
as in essence the moment of mediation - being in 'essence' Buridan's ass?
The fact of the matter is simply this:
The Estates are supposed to be the mediation between the crown and the executive on the one hand, and
the crown and the people on the other. But they are not this, but rather the organised political opposition
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (13 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
to civil society. The legislature in itself is in need of mediation, and indeed a mediation coming from the
Estates, as has been shown. The presupposed moral harmonisation of the two wills, the will of the state
as sovereign will and the will of the state as the will of civil society, does not suffice. Indeed only the
legislature is the organised, total political state; yet, precisely in it appears, because it is in its highest
degree of development, the open contradiction of the political state with itself. Thus, the appearance of a
real identity of the sovereign and Estate wills must be established. Either the Estates must be established
as the sovereign will or the sovereign will established as the Estates. The Estates must establish
themselves as the actuality of a will which is not the will of the Estates. The unity which is non-existent
in essence (otherwise it would have to prove itself by the Estates' efficacy and not by their mode of
existing) must at least be present in existence, or else an existing instance of the legislature (of the
Estates) has the task of being the unity of what is not united. This moment of the Estates, the Chamber of
Peers, the Upper House, etc., is the highest synthesis of the political state in the organisation just
considered. With that, however, Hegel does not achieve what he wants, namely, the actuality of
harmonisation and the impossibility of set hostility; rather, the whole thing remains at the point of the
possibility of harmonisation. However, it is the established illusion of the internal unity of the political
state (of the sovereign will and that of the Estates, and furthermore of the principle of the political state
and that of civil society), the illusion of this unity as material principle, that is to say, such that not only
two opposed principles unite but that the unity is that of one nature or existential ground. The Estates, as
this moment, are the romanticism of the political state, the dreams of its substantiality or internal
harmony. They are an allegorical existence.
Whether this illusion is an effective illusion or a conscious self-deception depends now on the actual
status quo of the relationship between the Estate and sovereign-elements. As long as the Estates and the
crown in fact harmonise, or get along together, the illusion in its essential unity is an actual, and thus
effective illusion. But on the other hand, should the truth of the illusion become manifest, then it
becomes a conscious lie and a ridicule.
§ 305. The principle of one of the classes of civil society is in itself capable of adaptation to this political
position. The class in question is the one whose ethical life is natural, whose basis is family life, and, so
far as its livelihood is concerned, the possession of land. Its particular members attain their position by
birth, just as the monarch does, and, in common with him, they possess a will which rests on itself alone.
We have already demonstrated Hegel's inconsistencies: (1) conceiving of the Estates in their modem
abstraction from civil society etc., after having them proceed from Corporations; (2) determining them
now once again according to the class distinction of civil society, after having already determined the
political Estates as such to be the extreme of empirical universality.
To be consistent one would have to examine the political Estates by themselves as a new element, and
then construct out of them the mediation which was demanded in § 304.
But now we see how Hegel reintroduces civil class distinction and, at the same time, makes it a pear that
it is not the actuality and particular nature of civil class distinction which determines the highest political
sphere, the legislature, but rather the reverse, that civil class distinction declines to a pure matter which
the political sphere forms and constructs in accordance with its need, a need which arises out of the
political sphere itself.
The principle of one of the classes of civil society is in itself capable of adaptation to this political
position. The class in question is one whose ethical life is natural. (The agricultural class.)
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (14 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
What, then, does this principle capability, or capability in principle of the agricultural class consist in?
Its basis is family life, and, so far as its livelihood is concerned, the possession of land. Its particular
members attain their position by birth, just as the monarch does, and, in common with him, they possess
a will which rests on itself alone.
The will which rests on itself alone is related to its livelihood, i.e., the possession of land, to its position
by birth which it has in common with the monarch, and to family life, as its basis.
Livelihood as possession of land and a will which rests on itself alone are two quite different things. One
should rather say a will which rests on ground and soil. One should rather speak of a will resting on the
disposition of the state, not of one resting on itself but in the whole. The possession of land takes the
place of the disposition, or the possession of political spirit.
Furthermore, in regard to family life as basis, the social ethical life of civil society appears to occupy a
higher position than this natural ethical life. Moreover, family life is the natural ethical life of the other
classes, of the civil as well as the agricultural class of civil society. But the fact that 'family life' is, in the
case of the agricultural class, not only the principle of the family but also the basis of this class' social
existence in general, seems to disqualify it for the highest political task; for this class will apply
patriarchal laws to a non-patriarchal sphere, and will think and act in terms of child or father, master and
servant, where the real questions are the political state and political citizenship.
Regarding the monarch's position by birth, Hegel has not developed a patriarchal but rather a modern
constitutional king. His position by birth consists in his being the bodily representative of the state and in
being born as king, or in the kingdom being his family inheritance. But what does this have in common
with family life as the basis of the agricultural class; and what does natural ethical-life have in common
with position by birth as such? The king has this in common with a horse, namely, just as the horse is
born a horse so the king is born a king.
Had Hegel made the class distinction, which he already accepted, a political distinction, then the
agricultural class as such would already be an independent part of the Estates; and if it is as such a
moment of mediation with the principality, why would the construction of a new mediation be
necessary? And why separate it off from the actual moment of the Estates, since this moment achieves its
abstract position vis-a-vis the crown only because of this separation? After he has developed the political
Estates as a specific element, as a transubstantiation of the unofficial class into state citizenship, and
precisely because of this has found the mediation to be a necessity, by what right does Hegel dissolve
this organism once more into the distinction of the unofficial class, and thus into the unofficial class, and
then derive from it the political state's mediation with itself?
In any case, what an anomaly, that the highest synthesis of the political state is nothing but the synthesis
of landed property and family life!
In a word:
If civil classes as such are political classes, then the mediation is not needed; and if this mediation is
needed, then the civil class is not political, and thus also not this mediation. The member of the
agricultural class is not as such, but as state citizen, a part of the political Estates; while in the opposite
case (i.e., where he, as member of the agricultural class, is state citizen, or as state citizen is member of
this class), his state citizenship is membership in the agricultural class; and then he is not, as member of
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (15 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
this class, a state citizen, but is as state citizen a member of this class!
Here, then, we find one of Hegel's inconsistencies within h' is own way of viewing things; and such an
inconsistency is an accommodation. The political Estates in the modern sense, which is the sense
developed by Hegel, constitute the frilly established separation of civil society from its unofficial class
and its distinctions. How can Hegel make the unofficial class the solution of the antinomies which the
legislature has within itself? Hegel wants the medieval system of Estates, but in the modern sense of the
legislature; and he wants the modern legislature, but within the framework of the medieval system of
Estates! This is syncretism at its worst.
The beginning of § 304 reads:
The Estates, as an element in political life, still retail). in their own function the class distinctions already
present in the lower spheres of civil life.
But in their own function, the Estates, as an clement in political life, retain this distinction only by
annulling it, negating it within themselves, abstracting themselves from it.
Should the agricultural class - or, as we will hear later, the empowered agricultural class, aristocratic
landed property - become as such, and as described, the mediation of the total political state, i.e., of the
legislature within itself, then it is certainly the mediation of the political Estates with the crown, in the
sense of being the dissolution of the political Estates as an actual political clement. Not the agricultural
class, but class, the unofficial class, the analysis (reduction) of the political Estates into the unofficial
class, constitutes here the reestablished unity of the political state with itself. (The mediation here is not
the agricultural class as such, but rather its separation from the political Estates in its quality as civil
unofficial class; that is, its unofficial class [reality] gives it a separate position within the political Estates,
whereupon the other section of the political Estates is also given the position of a particular unofficial
class, and, therefore, it ceases to represent the state citizenship of civil society.) Here then, the political
state no longer exists as two opposed wills; rather, on the one side stands the political state (the executive
and the sovereign), and on the other side stands civil society in its distinction from the political state (the
various classes). With that, then, the political state as a totality is abolished.
The other sense of the duplication of the political Estates within themselves as a mediation with the
crown is, in general, this: the internal separation of the political Estates, their own inner opposition, is a
re-established unity with the crown. The fundamental dualism between the crown and the Estates as an
element in the legislature is neutralised by the dualism within the Estates themselves. With Hegel,
however, this neutralisation is effected by the political Estates separating themselves from their political
element.
We will return later to the subject of possession of land as livelihood, which is supposed to accord with
sovereignty of Will, i.e., the sovereignty of the crown, and to family life as the basis of the agricultural
class, which is supposed to accord with the position by birth of the crown. What is developed here in §
305 is the principle of the agricultural class which is in itself capable of adaptation to this political
position.
§ 306 deals with the adaption to political position and significance; it reduces to the following: 'Their
wealth becomes inalienable, entailed, and burdened by primogeniture. Thus, primogeniture would be the
adaption of the agricultural class to politics.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (16 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
Primogeniture is grounded, so it says in the Addition, on the fact that the state should be able to reckon
not on the bare possibility of political inclinations, but on something necessary. Now an inclination for
politics is of course not bound up with wealth, but there is a relatively necessary connection between the
two, because a man with independent means is not hemmed in by external circumstances and so there is
nothing to prevent him from entering politics and working for the state.
First sentence: The state is not content with the bare possibility of political inclinations, but should be
able to reckon on something necessary.
Second sentence: An inclination for politics is of course not bound up with wealth; that is, the
inclination for politics in those of wealth is a bare possibility.
Third sentence: But there is a relatively necessary connection, namely, a man with independent means
etc. finds nothing to prevent him from working for the state; that is, the means provide the possibility of
political inclinations. But according to the first sentence, this possibility precisely does not suffice.
In addition, Hegel has failed to show that possession of land is the sole independent means.
The adaption of its means to independence is the adaption of the agricultural class to political position
and significance. In other words, independent means is its political position and significance.
This independence is further developed as follows:
Its wealth is independent of the state's capital. 'State's capital' here apparently means the government
treasury. In this respect the universal class, as essentially dependent on the state, stands in opposition.
As it says in the Preface:
Apart from anything else philosophy with us is not, as it was with the Greeks for instance, pursued in
private like an art, but has an existence in the open, in contact with the public, and especially, or even
only, in the service of the state.
Thus, philosophy is also essentially dependent upon the government treasury.
Its ['the agricultural class'] wealth is independent of the uncertainty of business, the quest for profit, and
any sort of fluctuation in possessions. From this aspect it is opposed by the business class as the one
which is dependent on needs and concentrated on their satisfaction.
This wealth is independent of favour, whether from the executive or the mob.
Finally, it is even fortified against its own wilfulness, because those members of this class who are called
to political life are not entitled, as other citizens are, either to dispose of their entire property at will, or to
the assurance that it will pass to their children, whom they love equally, in similarly equal divisions.
Here the oppositions have taken on an entirely new and materialistic form such as we would hardly
expect to find in the heaven of the political state.
In sharpest terms, the opposition, as Hegel develops it, is the opposition of private property and wealth.
The possession of land is private property kat exohin true private property. Its exact private nature is
prominent (1) as independence from state capital, from favour from the executive, from property existing
as universal property of the political state, a particular wealth which, alongside of other wealth, is in
accordance with the construction of the political state; (2) as independence from the need of society or
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (17 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
the social wealth, from favour from the mob. (Equally significant is the fact that a share in state capital is
understood as favour from the executive just as a share in the social wealth is understood as favour from
the mob.) Neither the wealth of the universal class nor that of the business class is true private property,
because such wealth is occasioned, in the former case directly, in the latter case indirectly, by the
connection with the universal wealth, or property as social property; both are a participation in it, and
therefore both are mediated through favour, that is, through the contingency of will. In opposition to that
stands the possession of land as sovereign private property, which has not yet acquired the form of
wealth, i.e., property established by the social will.
Thus, at its highest point the political constitution is the constitution of private property. The highest
political inclination is the inclination of private property. Primogeniture is merely the external
appearance of the internal nature of the possession of land. Because it is inalienable, its social nerves
have been severed and- its isolation from civil society is secured. By not passing on to the children whom
they love equally, it is independent even of the smallest society, the natural society, the family. By
having withdrawn from the volition and laws of the family it thus safeguards its rough nature of private
property against the transition into family wealth.
In § 305, Hegel declared the class of landed property to be capable of adaption to the political position
because family life would be its basis. But he himself has declared love to be the basis, the principle, the
spirit of family life. The class whose basis is family life thus lacks the basis of family life, i.e., love, as
the actual and thus effective and determining principle. It is spiritless family life, the illusion of family
life. In its highest form of development, the principle of private property contradicts the principle of the
family. Family life in civil society becomes family life, the life of love, only in opposition to the class of
natural ethical life, [which is, according to Hegel] the class of family life. This latter is, rather, the
barbarism of private property against family life.
This, then, would be the sovereign splendour of private property, of possession of land, about which so
many sentimentalities have recently been uttered and on behalf of which so many multi-colored crocodile
tears have been shed. it does not help Hegel to say that primogeniture would be merely a requirement of
politics and would have to be understood in its political position and significance. Neither does it help
him to say: 'The security and stability of the agricultural class may be still further increased by the
institution of primogeniture, though this institution is desirable only from the point of view of politics,
since it entails a sacrifice for the political end of giving the eldest son a life of independence.' There is a
certain decency of mind in Hegel. He does not want primogeniture in and for itself, but only in reference
to something else, not as something self-determined but as something determined by another, not as an
end but as a means for justifying and constructing an end. In fact, primogeniture is a consequence of the
exact possession of land; it is petrified private property, private property (quand même) in the highest
independence and sharpness of its development. What Hegel presents as the end, the determining factor,
the prima causa, of primogeniture is, instead, an effect, a consequence of the power of abstract private
property over the political state, while Hegel presents primogeniture as the power of the political state
over private property. He makes the cause the effect and the effect the cause, the determining that which
has been determined and that which has been determined the determining.
What then is the content of political adaption, of the political end: what is the end of this end, what is its
substance? Primogeniture, the superlative of private property, sovereign private property. What kind of
power does the political state exercise over private property in primogeniture? Does the state isolate it
from the family and society and bring it to its abstract autonomy? What then is the power of the political
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (18 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
state over private property? Private property's own power, its essence brought to existence. What remains
to the political state in opposition to this essence? The illusion that it determines when it is rather
determined. indeed, it breaks the will of the family and of society, but merely in order to give existence
to the will of private property lacking family and society, and to acknowledge this existence as the
highest existence of the political state, as the highest ethical existence.
Let us consider the various elements as they relate here in the legislature to the total state, the state
having achieved actuality, consistency, and consciousness, i.e., to the actual political state in connection
with the ideal or what ought be, with the logical character and form of these elements.
(Primogeniture is not, as Hegel says, a chain on the freedom of private rights; it is rather the freedom of
private rights which has freed itself from all social and ethical chains.) (The highest political construction
is the construction of abstract private property.)
Before we make this comparison we should first consider more closely one statement of the paragraph,
namely, that because of primogeniture the wealth of the agricultural class, possession of land, private
property, is even fortified against its own wilfulness, because those members of this class who are called
to political life are not entitled, as other citizens are, to dispose of their entire property at will'.
We have already indicated how the social nerves of private property are severed because of the
inalienability of landed property. Private property (landed property) is fortified against the owner's own
wilfulness by having the sphere of his wilfulness suddenly changed from a universal human sphere into
the specific wilfulness of private property. In other words, private property has become the subject of the
will, and the will is merely the predicate of private property. Private property is no longer a determined
object of wilfulness, but rather wilfulness is the determined predicate of private property. Yet let us
compare this with what Hegel himself says about the sphere of private rights:
§ 65. The reason I can alienate my property is that it is mine only in so far as I put my will into it ...
provided always that the thing in question is a thing external by nature.
§ 66. Therefore those goods, or rather substantive characteristics, which constitute my own private
personality and the universal essence of my self-consciousness are inalienable and my right to them is
imprescriptible. Such characteristics are my personality as such, my universal freedom of will, my ethical
life, my religion.
Therefore in primogeniture landed property, exact private property, becomes an inalienable good, thus a
substantive characteristic which constitutes the very private personality and universal essence of
self-consciousness of the class of noble entailed estates, its personality as such, its universal freedom of
will, its ethical life, its religion. Thus it is also consistent to say that where private property, landed
property, is inalienable, universal freedom of will (to which also belongs free disposition of something
alienable, like landed property) and ethical life (to which also belongs love as the actual spirit of the
family, the spirit which is also identified with the actual law of the family) are alienable. in general then,
the inalienability of private property is the alienability of universal freedom of will and ethical life. Here
it is no longer the case that property is in so far as I put my will into it, but rather my will is in so far as it
is in property. Here my will does not own but is owned. This is precisely the romantic itch of the nobility
of primogeniture, namely, that here private property, and thus private wilfulness in its most abstract form
- the totally ignorant, unethical, crude will - appears to be the highest synthesis of the political state, the
highest renunciation of wilfulness, the hardest and most self-sacrificing struggle with human weakness;
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (19 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
for what appears here to be human weakness is actually the humanising, the humanisation of private
property.
Primogeniture is private property which has become a religion for itself, which has become absorbed in
itself, enchanted with its autonomy and nobility. Just as primogeniture is derived from direct alienation,
so too it is derived from the contract. Hegel presents the transition from property to contract in the
following manner:
§ 71. Existence as determinate being is in essence being for another;... One aspect of property is that it is
an existent as an external thing, and in this respect property exists for other external things and is
connected with their necessity and contingency. But it is also an existent as an embodiment of will, and
from this point of view the 'other' for which it exists can only be the will of another person. This relation
of will to will is the true and proper ground in which freedom is existent. - The sphere of contract is made
up of this mediation whereby I hold property not merely by means of a thing and my subjective will but
by means of another person's will as well and so hold it in virtue of my participation in a common will.
(In primogeniture it has been made a state law to hold property not in one common will, but merely by
means of a thing and my subjective will.) While Hegel here perceives in private rights the alienability
and dependence of private property on a common will as its true idealism, in state rights, on the other
hand, he praises the imaginary nobility of independent property as opposed to the uncertainty of
business, the quest for profit, any sort of fluctuation in possessions, and dependence on the state's capital.
What kind of state is this that cannot even tolerate the idealism of private rights? And what kind of
philosophy of right is this in which the independence of private property has diverse meanings in the
spheres of private and state rights?
Over against the crude stupidity of independent private property, the uncertainty of business is elegiac,
the quest for profit solemn (dramatic), fluctuation in possessions a serious fatum (tragic), dependence on
the state's capital ethical. In short, in all of these qualities the human heart pulses throughout the property,
which is the dependence of man on man. No matter how it may be constituted it is human toward the
slave who believes himself to be free, because the sphere that limits him is not society but the soil. The
freedom of this will is its emptiness of content other than that of private property.
To define monstrosities like primogeniture as a determination of private property by the state is
absolutely unavoidable if one interprets an old world view in terms of a new one, if one attributes to a
thing, as in this case to private property, a double meaning, one in the court of abstract right and an
opposed one in the heaven of the political state.
Now we come to the comparison mentioned earlier. § 257 says:
The state is the actuality of the ethical Idea. It is ethical mind qua the substantial will manifest and
revealed to itself.. The state exists immediately in custom, mediately in individual self-consciousness ...
while self-consciousness in virtue of its sentiment towards the state finds in the state, as its essence and
the end and product of its activity, its substantive freedom.
§ 268 says:
The political sentiment, patriotism pure and simple, is assured conviction with truth as its basis... and a
volition which has become habitual. In this sense it is simply a product of the institutions subsisting in
the state, since rationality is actually present in the state, while action in conformity with these
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (20 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
institutions gives rationality its practical proof. This sentiment is, in general, trust (which may pass over
into a greater or lesser degree of educated insight), or the consciousness that my interest, both substantive
and particular, is contained and preserved in another's (i.e., in the state's) interest and end, i.e., in the
other's relation to me as an individual. In this way, this very other is immediately not another in my eyes,
and in being conscious of this fact I am free.
Here, the actuality of the ethical Idea appears as the religion of private property (because in
primogeniture private property relates to itself in a religious manner, so it happens that in our modem
times religion in general has become a quality inherent in landed property, and that all of the writings on
the nobility of primogeniture are full of religious unction. Religion is the highest thought form of this
brutality.) The substantial will manifest and revealed to itself changes into a will dark and broken on the
soil, a will enraptured precisely with the impenetrability of the element to which it is attached. The
assured conviction with truth as its basis, which is political sentiment, is the conviction standing on 'its
own ground' (in the literal sense). The political volition which has become habitual no longer remains
simply a product [of the institutions subsisting in the state], but rather an institution subsisting outside the
state. The political sentiment is no longer trust but rather the reliance, the consciousness that my interest,
both substantive and particular, is independent of another's (i.e., the state's) interest and end, i.e., in the
other's relation to me as an individual. This is the consciousness of my freedom from the state.
The maintenance of the state's universal interest etc. was (§ 289) the task of the executive. In it resided
the consciousness of right and the developed intelligence of the mass of the people (§ 297). It actually
makes the Estates superfluous, for even without the Estates they [i.e., the highest civil servants] are able
to do what is best, just as they also continually have to do while the Estates are in session (Remark to §
301). The universal class, or, more precisely, the class of civil servants, must, purely in virtue of its
character as universal, have the universal as the end of its essential activity [§ 303].
And how does the universal class, the executive, appear now? As essentially dependent upon the state, as
wealth dependent upon the favour of the executive. The very same transformation has occurred within
civil society, which earlier achieved its ethical life in the Corporation. It is a wealth dependent upon the
uncertainty of business etc., upon the favour of the mob.
What then is the quality which ostensibly specifies the owners of entailed estates? And what, in any case,
constitutes the ethical quality of an inalienable wealth? Incorruptibility. Incorruptibility appears to be the
highest political virtue, an abstract virtue. Yet, incorruptibility in the state as constructed by Hegel is
something so uncommon that it has to be built up into a particular political power; which precisely
proves, that incorruptibility is not the spirit of the political state, not the rule but the exception, and is
constructed as such. The owners of entailed estates are corrupted by their independent property in order
that they be preserved from corruption. While according to the idea dependence upon the state and the
feeling of this dependence is supposed to be the highest political freedom, here the independent private
person is constructed; because political freedom is the private person's feeling of being an abstract,
dependent person, whereas he feels and should feel independent only as a citizen. Its capital is
independent alike of the state's capital, the uncertainty of business, etc. In opposition to it stands the
business class, which is dependent on needs and concentrated on their satisfaction, and the civil servant
class, which is essentially dependent upon the state. Here, therefore, independence from the state and
civil society and this actualised abstraction of both, which in reality is the crudest dependence on the soil,
forms in the legislature the mediation and the unity of both. Independent private wealth, i.e., abstract
private wealth and the corresponding private person, are the highest political construction of the state.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (21 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:32]
Political independence is constructed as independent private property and the person of this independent
private property. We shall see in the following paragraph what the situation is re vera regarding this
independence and incorruptibility, and the political sentiment arising from them.
The fact that primogeniture is inherited, or entailed wealth speaks for itself. More about this later. The
fact that it accrues to the first-born is, as Hegel notes in the Addition, purely historical.
§ 307. The right of this section of the agricultural class is thus based in a way on the natural principle of
the family. But this principle is at the same time reversed owing to hard sacrifices made for political
ends, and thereby the activity of this class is essentially directed to those ends. As a consequence of this,
this class is summoned and entitled to its political vocation by birth without the hazards of election.
Hegel has failed to develop the way in which the right of this agricultural class is based on the natural
principle of the family, unless by this he understands that landed property exists as entailed or inherited
wealth. That, however, establishes no right of this class in the political sense, but only the birthright of
the owners of entailed estates to landed property. 'This', i.e., the natural principle of the family, is 'at the
same time reversed owing to hard sacrifices made for political ends'. We have certainly seen how the
natural principle of the family is reversed; this, however, is no hard sacrifice made for political ends, but
rather the actualised abstraction of private property. But with this reversal of the natural principle of the
family the political ends are likewise reversed, 'thereby (?) the activity of this class is essentially directed
to those ends' - because private property received independence? - and 'as a consequence of this, this
class is summoned and entitled to its political vocation by birth without the hazards of election'.
Here then participation in the legislature is an innate human right. Here we have born legislators, i.e.,
born mediation of the political state with itself. innate human rights have been mocked, especially on
behalf of the owners of entailed estates. Isn't it even more humorous that one particular group of men is
entrusted with the right to the highest honour, the legislature? In Hegel's treatment of the summons to the
legislator, to the representative of state citizenship, there is nothing more ridiculous than his opposing
summons by birth to summons by the hazards of election. As if election, the conscious product of civil
trust, would not stand in a completely different necessary connection with the political ends than does the
physical accident of birth. Hegel everywhere falls from his political spiritualism into the crassest
materialism. At the summit of the political state it is always birth that makes determinate individuals into
embodiments of the highest political tasks. The highest political activities coincide with individuals by
reason of birth, Just like an animal's position, character, way of life, etc. are immediately inborn. in its
highest functions the state acquires an animal actuality. Nature takes revenge on Hegel for the disdain he
showed it. If matter is supposed to constitute no longer anything for itself over against the human will,
the human will no longer retains anything for itself except the matter.
The false identity, the fragmentary and sporadic identity of nature and spirit, body and soul, appears as
incarnation. Since birth gives man only an individual existence and establishes him merely as a natural
individual, and since the functions of the state - as for instance the legislature, etc. are social products,
i.e., births of society and not procreations of the natural individual, then what is striking and miraculous
is precisely the immediate identity, the sudden coincidence, of the individual's birth with the individual
as individuation of a certain social position, function, etc. - In this system, nature immediately creates
kings, peers, etc. just as it creates eyes and noses. What is striking is to see as immediate product of the
physical species what is only the product of the self-conscious species. I am man by birth, without the
agreement of society; yet only through universal agreement does this determinate birth become peer or
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (22 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:33]
king. Only the agreement makes the birth of this man the birth of a king. It is therefore the agreement,
not birth, that makes the king. If birth, in distinction from other determinations, immediately endows man
with a position, then his body makes him this determined social functionary. His body is his social right.
In this system, the physical dignity of man, or the dignity of the human body (with further elaboration,
meaning: the dignity of the physical natural element of the state), appears in such a form that determinate
dignities, specifically the highest social dignities, are the dignities of certain bodies which are determined
and predestined by birth to be such. This is, of course, why we find in the aristocracy such pride in blood
and descent, in short, in the life history of their body. It is this zoological point of view which has its
corresponding science in heraldry. The secret of aristocracy is zoology.
Two moments in hereditary primogeniture are to be stressed:
1. That which is permanent is entailed wealth, landed property. This is the preserving moment in the
relation - the substance. The master of the entailed estate, the owner, is really a mere accident. Landed
property anthropomorphises itself in the various generations. Landed property always inherits, as it were,
the first born of the house as an attribute linked to it. Every first born in the line of land owners is the
inheritance, the property, of the inalienable landed property, which is the predestined substance of his
will and activity. The subject is the thing and the predicate is the man. The will becomes the property of
the property.
2. The political quality of the owner of the entailed estate is the political quality of his inherited wealth, a
political quality inhering in his inherited wealth. Here, therefore, the political quality appears also as the
property of landed property, as a quality which is ascribed directly to the bare physical earth (nature)
Regarding the first point, it follows that the owner of the entailed estate is the serf of the landed property,
and that in the serfs who are subordinated to him there appears only the practical consequence of the
theoretical relationship with landed property in which he himself stands. The depth of German
subjectivity appears everywhere as the crudity of a mindless objectivity.
Here we must analyse (1) the relation between private property and inheritance, (2) the relation between
private property, inheritance, and, thereby, the privilege of certain generations to participate in political
sovereignty, (3) the actual historical relation, or the Germanic relation.
We have seen that primogeniture is the abstraction of independent private property. A second
consequence follows from this. Independence, autonomy, in the political state whose construction we
have followed so far, is private property, which at its peak appears as inalienable landed property.
Political independence thus flows not ex proprio sinu of the political state; it is not a gift of the political
state to its members, nor is it the animating spirit [of the political state]. Rather, the members of the
political state receive their independence from a being which is not the being of the political state, from a
being of abstract private right, namely, from abstract private property. Political independence is an
accident of private property and not the substance of the political state. The political state - and within it
the legislature, as we have seen - is the unveiled mystery of the true value and essence of the moments of
the state. The significance that private property has in the political state is its essential, its true
significance; the significance that class distinction has in the political state is the essential significance of
class distinction. In the same way, the essence of the sovereign and of the executive come to appearance
in the legislature. It is here, in the sphere of the political state, that the individual moments of the state
relate to themselves as to the being of the species, the 'species-being'; because the political state is the
sphere of their universal character, i.e., their religious sphere. The political state is the mirror of truth for
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (23 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:33]
the various moments of the concrete state.
Thus, if independent private property in the political state, in the legislature, has the significance of
political independence, then it is the political independence of the state. Independent private property, or
actual private property is then not only the support of the constitution but the constitution itself. And isn't
the support of the constitution nothing other than the constitution of constitutions, the primary, the actual
constitution?
Hegel himself was surprised about the immanent development of science, the derivation of its entire
content from the concept in its simplicity (Remark to § 279), when he was constructing the hereditary
monarch, and made the following remark:
Hence it is the basic moment of personality, abstract at the start in immediate rights, which has matured
itself through its various forms of subjectivity, and now - at the stage of absolute rights, of the state, of
the completely concrete objectivity of the will - has become the personality of the state, its certainty of
itself.
That is, in the political state it comes to appearance that abstract personality is the highest political
personality, the political basis of the entire state. Likewise, in primogeniture, the right of this abstract
personality, its objectivity, abstract private property, comes into existence as the highest objectivity of
the state, i.e., as its highest right.
The state is hereditary monarch; abstract personality means nothing other than that the personality of the
state is abstract, or that it is the state of abstract personality, just as the Romans developed the rights of
the monarch purely within the norms of private rights, or private rights as the highest norm of state, or
political rights.
The Romans are the rationalists, the Germans the mystics of sovereign private property.
Hegel calls private rights the rights of abstract personality, or abstract rights. And indeed they have to be
developed as the abstraction, and thus the illusory rights, of abstract personality, just as the moral
doctrine developed by Hegel is the illusory existence of abstract subjectivity. Hegel develops private
rights and morals as such abstractions, from which it does not follow, for him, that the state or ethical life
of which they are the presuppositions can be nothing but the society (the social life) of these illusions;
rather, he concludes that they are subalternate moments of this ethical life. But what are private rights
except the rights of these subjects of the state, and what is morality except their morality? In other words,
the person of private rights and the subject of morals are the person and the subject of the state. Hegel
has been widely criticised for his development of morality. He has done nothing but develop the morality
of the modern state and modern private rights. A more complete separation of morality from the state, its
fuller emancipation, was desired. What did that prove except that the separation of the present-day state
from morals is moral, that morals are non-political and that the state is not moral? It is rather a great,
though from one aspect (namely, from the aspect that Hegel declares the state, whose presupposition is
such a morality, to be the realistic idea of ethical life) an unconscious service of Hegel to have assigned
to modem morality its true position.
In the constitution, wherein primogeniture is a guarantee, private property is the guarantee of the political
constitution. In primogeniture, it appears that this guarantee is a particular kind of private property.
Primogeniture is merely a particular existence of the universal relationship of private property and the
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (24 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:33]
political state. Primogeniture is the political sense of private property, private property in its political
significance, that is to say, in its universal significance. Thus the constitution here is the constitution of
private property.
With the Germanic peoples, where we encounter primogeniture in its classical formation, we also find
the constitution of private property. Private property is a universal category, the universal bond of the
state. Even the universal functions appear as the private property sometimes of a Corporation, sometimes
of an estate.
Trade and business in their particular nuances were the private property of particular Corporations. Royal
offices, jurisdiction, etc., were the private property of particular estates. The various provinces were the
private property of individual princes etc. Service for the realm was the private property of the ruler. The
spirit was the private property of the spiritual authority.' One's loyal activity was the private property of
another, just as one's right was, once again, a particular private property. Sovereignty, here nationality,
was the private property of the Emperor.
It has often been said that in the Middle Ages every form of right, of freedom, of social existence,
appears as a privilege, an exception from the rule. The empirical fact that all these privileges appear in
the form of private property could thus not have been overlooked. What is the universal reason for this
coincidence? Private property is the species-existence of privilege, of right as an exception.
Where the sovereigns, as in France for instance, attacked the independence of private property, they
directed their attention more to the property of the Corporations than to that of individuals. But in
attacking the private property of the Corporations they attacked private property as Corporations, i.e., as
the social bond.
In the feudal reign it almost appears that the power of the crown is the power of private property, and that
the mystery of the nature of the universal power, the power of all spheres of the state, is deposited in the
sovereign.
(The powerfulness of the state is expressed in the sovereign as the representative of the power of the
state. The constitutional sovereign, therefore, expresses the idea of the constitutional state in its sharpest
abstraction. On the one hand he is the idea of the state, the sanctified majesty of the state, and precisely
as this person. At the same time he is a pure imagination; as person and as sovereign he has neither
actual power nor actual function. Here, the separation of the political and the actual, the formal and the
material, the universal and the particular person, Of man and social man, is expressed in its highest
contradiction.)
Private property is a child of Roman intellect and Germanic heart. At this point it will be valuable to
undertake a comparison of these two extreme developments. This will help solve the political problem as
discussed.
The Romans were the first to have formulated the right of private property, i.e., the abstract right, the
private right, the right of the abstract person. The Roman conception of private right is private right in its
classical formulation. Yet nowhere with the Romans do we find that the right of private property was
mystified as in the case of the Germans. Nowhere does it become right of the state.
The right of private property is jus utendi et abutendi, the right of wilfulness in disposing of a thing. The
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (25 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:33]
main interest of the Romans lay in developing the relationships, and in determining which ones resulted
in abstract relations of private property. The actual basis of private property, the property, is a factum, an
unexplainable factum, and no right. Only through legal determinations, which the society attributes to the
factual property, does it receive the quality of rightful property, private property.
Regarding the connection between the political constitution and private property with the Romans, it
appears that:
1. Man (as slave), as is generally the case with ancient peoples, is the object of private property.
This is nothing specific.
2. Conquered countries are treated as private property, jus utendi et abutendi being asserted in their case.
3. In their history itself, there appears the struggle between the poor and the rich (Patricians and Plebians)
etc.
In other respects, private property as a whole, as with the ancient classical peoples in general, is asserted
to be public property, either as the republic's expenditure - as in good times - or as luxurious and
universal benefaction (baths, etc.) towards the mob.
Slavery finds its explanation in the rights of war, the rights of occupation: men are slaves precisely
because their political existence is destroyed.
We especially stress two relationships in distinction from the Germans.
1. The imperial power was not the power of private property, but rather the sovereignty of the empirical
will as such, which was far from regarding private property as the bond between itself and its subjects;
on the contrary, it dealt with private property as it did with all other social goods. The imperial power,
therefore, was nothing other than factually hereditary. The highest formation of the right of private
property, of private right, indeed belongs to the imperial epoch; however, it is a consequence of the
political dissolution rather than the political dissolution being a consequence of private property.
Furthermore, when private right achieved full development in Rome, state right was abolished, [or] was
in the process of its dissolution, while in Germany the opposite was the case.
2. In Rome, state honours are never hereditary; that is to say, private property is not the dominant
category of the state.
3. Contrary to German primogeniture etc., in Rome the wilfulness of the testator appears to be the
derivative of private property. In this latter antithesis lies the entire difference between the German and
the Roman development of private property.
(In primogeniture it appears that private property is the relationship to the function of the state which is
such that the existence of the state is something inhering in, or is an accident of, direct private property,
i.e., landed property. At its highest levels the state appears as private property, whereas private property
should appear as property of the state. Instead of making private property a civil quality, Hegel makes
political citizenship, existence, and sentiment a quality of private property.)
Contents - [1] - [2] - [3] - [4] - [5] - [6] - 1844 Introduction
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch05.htm (26 of 26) [23/08/2000 18:49:33]
Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right
Karl Marx, 1843
§ 308. The second section of the Estates comprises the fluctuating element in civil society. This element
can enter politics only through its deputies; the multiplicity of its members is an external reason for this,
but the essential reason is the specific character of this element and its activity. Since these deputies are
the deputies of civil society, it follows as a direct consequence that their appointment is made by the
society as a society. That is to say, in making the appointment, society is not dispersed into atomic units,
collected to perform only a single and temporary act, and kept together for a moment and no longer. On
the contrary, it makes the appointment as a society, articulated into associations, communities, and
Corporations, which although constituted already for other purposes, acquire in this way a connection
with politics. The existence of the Estates and their assembly finds a constitutional guarantee of its own
in the fact that this class is entitled to send deputies at the summons of the crown, while members of the
former class are entitled to present themselves in person in the Estates (see § 307).
Here we find a new distinction within civil society and the Estates: the distinction between a fluctuating
element and an immutable element (landed property). This distinction has also been presented as that of
space and time, conservative and progressive, etc. On this, see Hegel's previous paragraphs. Incidentally,
by means of the Corporations, associations, etc., Hegel has made the fluctuating element of society also a
stable element.
The second distinction consists in the fact that the first element of the Estates as developed above, the
owners of entailed estates, are, as such, legislators; that legislative power is an attribute of their
empirical, personal existence; that they act not as deputies but as themselves; whereas in the second
element of the Estates election and selection of deputies take place.
Hegel gives two reasons why this fluctuating element of civil society can enter the political state, or
legislature, only through deputies. Hegel himself calls the first reason - namely, the multiplicity of its
members - external, thereby relieving us of the need of giving the same reply.
But the essential reason, he says, is the specific character of this element and its activity. Political
occupation and activity are alien to its specific character and activity.
Hegel replays his old song about these Estates being deputies of civil society. Civil society must make
the appointments as a society. Rather, civil society must do this as what it is not, because it is unpolitical
society, and is supposed to perform here a political act as something essential to it and arising from it.
With that it is 'dispersed into atomic units', and collected to perform only a single and temporary act, and
kept together for a moment and no longer'. First of all, its political act is a single and temporary act, and
can therefore only appear as such in being carried out. It is an ecstasy, an act of political society which
causes a stir, and must also appear as such. Secondly, Hegel was not disturbed by the fact - indeed, he
argued its necessity - that civil society materially (merely as a second society deputised by it) separates
itself from its civil actuality and establishes itself as what it is not. How can he now formally dispose of
this?
He thinks that society's associations etc., which are constituted already for other purposes, acquire a
connection with politics because society in its Corporations etc. appoints the deputies. But either they
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch06.htm (1 of 13) [23/08/2000 18:49:41]
acquire a significance which is not their significance, or their connection as such is political, in which
case it does not just 'acquire' the political tinge, as developed above, but rather in it politics acquires its
connection. By designating only this part of the Estates as that of the deputy, Hegel has unwittingly
stated the nature of the two Chambers (at the point where they actually have the relationship to one
another he indicated). The Chamber of Deputies and the Chamber of Peers (or whatever they be called)
are not, in the present case, different instances of the same principle) but derive from two essentially
different principles and social positions. Here the Chamber of Deputies is the political constitution of
civil society in the modern sense, while the Chamber of Peers is the political constitution of civil society
in the sense proper to the Estates. The Chamber of Peers and the Chamber of Deputies are opposed here
as the Estate- and the political-representation of civil society. The one is the existing estate principle of
civil society, the other is the actualisation of civil society's abstract political existence. It is obvious,
therefore, that the latter cannot come into existence again as the representation of the estates,
Corporations, etc., for it simply does not represent civil society's existence qua estate, but rather its
political existence. It is further obvious, then, that only the estate element of civil society, i.e., sovereign
landed property or the hereditary nobility, is seated in the former Chamber, for it is not one estate among
others. Rather, the estate principle of civil society as an actually social, and thus political, principle now
exists only in that one element. It is the estate. Civil society, then, has in the Chamber of the estates the
representative of its medieval existence, and in the Chamber of Deputies the representative of its political
(modern) existence. The only advance beyond the Middle Ages consists in the fact that estate politics has
been reduced to a particular political existence alongside the politics of citizenship. The empirical
political existence Hegel has in mind (England) has, therefore, a meaning entirely other than the one he
imputes to it.
The French Constitution also constitutes an advance in this regard. To be sure, it has reduced the
Chamber of Peers to a pure nullity; but within the principle of constitutional kingship as Hegel has
pretended to develop it, this Chamber can by its very nature be merely an empty vanity, the fiction of a
harmony between the sovereign and civil society, or of the legislature or political state with itself, and a
fiction, moreover, which has the form of a particular and thereby once more opposed existence.
The French have allowed the peers to retain life tenure in order to express their independence from both
the r6gime and the people. But they did away with the medieval expression - hereditariness. Their
advance consists in their no longer allowing the Chamber of Peers to proceed from actual civil society,
but in creating it in abstraction from civil society. They have the choice of peers proceed from the
existing political state, from the sovereign, without binding him to any other civil quality' In this
constitution the honour of being a peer actually constitutes a class in civil society which is purely
political, created from the standpoint of the abstraction of the political state; but it appears to be more a
political decoration than an actual class endowed with particular rights. During the Restoration the
Chamber of Peers was a reminiscence, while the Chamber of Peers resulting from the July Revolution is
an actual creature of constitutional monarchy.
Since in modern times the idea of the state could appear only in the abstraction of the merely political
state, or in the abstraction of civil society from itself and its actual condition, it is to the credit of the
French that they have marked and produced this abstract actuality, and thereby have produced the
political principle itself The abstraction for which they are blamed is, then, a genuine consequence and
product of a patriotism rediscovered, to be sure, only in an opposition, but in a necessary opposition. The
merit of the French in this regard, then, is to have established the Chamber of Peers as the unique product
of the political state, or in general, to have made the political principle in its uniqueness the determining
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch06.htm (2 of 13) [23/08/2000 18:49:41]
and effective factor.
Hegel also remarks that in the deputation, as he constructs it, the existence of the Estates and their
assembly finds a constitutional guarantee of its own in the fact that the Corporations etc. are entitled to
send deputies. Thus, the guarantee of the existence of the Estates' assembly, their truly primitive
existence, becomes the privilege of the Corporations etc. With this, Hegel reverts completely to the
medieval standpoint and has abandoned entirely his abstraction of the political state as the sphere of the
state as state, the actually existing universal.
In the modern sense, the existence of the Estates' assembly is the political existence of civil society, the
guarantee of its political existence. To question the existence of the Estates' assembly is to question the
existence of the state. Whereas patriotism, the essence of the legislature, finds its guarantee in
independent private property according to Hegel, so the existence of the legislature finds its guarantee in
the privileges of the Corporations.
But the one element in the Estates is much more the political privilege of civil society, or its privilege of
being political. Therefore, that element can never be the privilege of a particular civil mode of civil
society's existence, and can still less find its guarantee in that mode, because it is supposed to be, rather,
the universal guarantee.
Thus Hegel is everywhere reduced to giving the political state a precarious actuality in a relationship of
dependence upon another, rather than describing it as the highest, completely existing actuality of social
existence; he is reduced to having it find its true existence in the other sphere rather than describing it as
the true existence of the other sphere. The political state everywhere needs the guarantee of spheres lying
outside it. It is not actualised power, but supported impotence. It is not the power over these supports, but
the power of the support. The support is the seat of power.
What kind of lofty existent is it whose existence needs a guarantee outside itself, and which is supposed
to be at the same time the universal existence - and thus the actual guarantee - of this very guarantee. In
general, in his development of the legislature Hegel everywhere retreats from the philosophical
standpoint to that other standpoint which fails to examine the matter in its own terms.
If the existence of the Estates requires a guarantee, then they are not an actual, but merely a fictitious
political existence. In constitutional states, the guarantee for the existence of the Estates is the law. Thus,
their existence is a legal existence, dependent on the universal nature of the state and not on the power or
impotence of individual Corporations or associations; their existence is the actuality of the state as an
association. (It is precisely here that the Corporations, etc., the particular spheres of civil society, should
receive their universal existence for the first time. Again, Hegel anticipates this universal existence as the
privilege and the existence of these particular spheres.)
Political right as the right of Corporations etc. completely contradicts political right as political, i.e., as
the right of the state and of citizenship, for political right precisely should not be the right of this
existence as a particular existence, not right as this particular existence.
Before we proceed to the category of election as the political act by which civil society decides upon its
political choice, let us examine some additional statements from the Remark to this paragraph.
To hold that every single person should share in deliberating and deciding on political matters of general
concern o the ground that all individuals are members of the state, that its concerns are their concerns,
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch06.htm (3 of 13) [23/08/2000 18:49:41]
and that it is their right that what is done should be done with their knowledge and volition, is tantamount
to a proposal to put the democratic element without any rational form into the organism of the state,
although it is only in virtue of the possession of such a form that the state is an organism at all. This idea
comes readily to mind because it does not go beyond the abstraction of 'being a member of the state'. and
it is superficial thinking which clings to abstractions. [§ 308]
First of all, Hegel calls being a member of the state an abstraction, although according to the idea, [and
therefore] the intention of his own doctrinal development, it is the highest and most concrete social
determination of the legal person, of the member of the state. To stop at the abstraction of 'being a
member of the state' and to conceive of individuals in terms of this abstraction does not therefore seem to
be just superficial thinking which clings to abstractions. That the abstraction of 'being a member of the
state' is really an abstraction is not, however, the fault of this thinking but of Hegel's line of argument and
actual modern conditions, which presuppose the separation of actual life from political life and make the
political quality an abstraction of actual participation in the state.
According to Hegel, the direct participation of all in deliberating and deciding on political matters of
general concern admits the democratic element without any rational form into the organism of the state,
although it is only in virtue of the possession of such a form that the state is an organism at all. That is to
say, the democratic element can be admitted only as a formal element in a state organism that is merely a
formalism of the state. The democratic element should be, rather, the actual element that acquires its
rational form in the whole organism of the state. If the democratic element enters the state organism or
state formalism as a particular element, then the rational form of its existence means a drill, an
accommodation, a form, in which it does not exhibit what is characteristic of its essence. In other words,
it would enter the state organism merely as a formal principle.
We have already pointed out that Hegel develops merely a state formalism. For him, the actual material
principle is the Idea, the abstract thought-form of the state as a subject, the absolute Idea which has in it
no passive or material moment. In contrast to the abstraction of this Idea the determinations of the actual,
empirical state formalism appear as content; and hence the actual content (here actual man, actual
society, etc.) appear as formless inorganic matter.
Hegel had established the essence of the Estates in the fact that in them empirical universality becomes
the subject of the actually existing universal. Does this mean anything other than that matters of political
concern 'are their concerns, and that it is their right that what is done should be done with their
knowledge and volition'? And should not the Estates precisely constitute their actualised right? And is it
surprising then that all seek the actuality of what is theirs by right?
To hold that every single person should share in deliberating and deciding on political matters of general
concern...
In a really rational state one could answer, 'Not every single person should share in deliberating and
deciding on political matters of general concern', because the individuals share in deliberating and
deciding on matters of general concern as the 'all', that is to say, within and as members of the society.
Not all individually, but the individuals as all.
Hegel presents himself with the dilemma: either civil society (the Many, the multitude) shares through
deputies in deliberating and deciding on political matters of general concern or all [as] I individuals do
this. This is no opposition of essence, as Hegel subsequently tries to present it, but of existence, and
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch06.htm (4 of 13) [23/08/2000 18:49:41]
indeed of the most external existence, quantity. Thus, the basis which Hegel himself designated as
external - the multiplicity of members - remains the best reason against the direct participation of all. The
question of whether civil society should participate in the legislature either by entering it through
deputies or by the direct participation of all as individuals is itself a question within the abstraction of the
political state or within the abstract political state; it is an abstract political question.
It is in both cases, as Hegel himself has developed this, the political significance of 'empirical
universality'.
In its proper form the opposition is this: the individuals participate as all, or the individuals participate as
a few, as not all. In both cases allness remains merely an external plurality or totality of individuals.
Allness is no essential, spiritual, actual quality of the individual. It is not something through which he
would lose the character of abstract individuality. Rather, it is merely the sum total of individuality. One
individuality, many individualities, all individualities. The one, the many, the all - none of these
determinations changes the essence of the subject, individuality.
All as individuals should share in deliberating and deciding on political matters of general concern; that
is to say, then, that all should share in this not as all but as individuals.
The question appears to contradict itself in two respects.
The political matters of general concern are the concern of the state, the state as actual concern.
Deliberation and decision is the effectuation of the state as actual concern. It seems obvious then that all
the members of the state have a relationship to the state as being their actual concern. The very notion of
member of the state implies their being a member of the state, a part of it, and the state having them as its
part. But if they are an integral part of the state, then it is obvious that their social existence is already
their actual participation in it. They are not only integral parts of the state, but the state is their integral
part. To be consciously an integral part of something is to participate consciously in it, to be consciously
integral to it. Without this consciousness the member of the state would be an animal.
To say 'political matters of general concern' makes it appear that matters of general concern and the state
are something different. But the state is the matter of general concern, thus really the matters of general
concern.
Participation in political matters of general concern and participation in the state are, therefore, identical.
It is a tautology [to say] that a member of the state, a part of the state, participates in the state, and that
this participation can appear only as deliberation or decision, or related forms, and thus that every
member of the state shares in deliberating and deciding (if these functions are taken to be the functions of
actual participation in the state) the political matters of general concern. If we are talking about actual
members of the state, then this participation cannot be regarded as a 'should'; otherwise we would be
talking about subjects who should be and want to be members of the state, but actually are not.
On the other hand, if we are talking about definite concerns, about single political acts, then it is again
obvious that not all as individuals accomplish them. Otherwise, the individual would be the true society,
and would make society superfluous. The individual would have to do everything at once, while society
would have him act for others just as it would have others act for him.
The question whether all as individuals should share in deliberating and deciding on political matters of
general concern is a question that arises from the separation of the political state and civil society.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch06.htm (5 of 13) [23/08/2000 18:49:41]
As we have seen, the state exists merely as political state. The totality of the political state is the
legislature. To participate in the legislature is thus to participate in the political state and to prove and
actualise one's existence as member of the political state, as member of the state. That all as individuals
want to participate integrally in the legislature is nothing but the will of all to be actual (active) members
of the state, or to give themselves a political existence, or to prove their existence as political and to
effect it as such. We have further seen that the Estates are civil society as legislature, that they are its
political existence. The fact, therefore, that civil society invades the sphere of legislative power en masse,
and where possible totally, that actual civil society wishes to substitute itself for the fictional civil society
of the legislature, is nothing but the drive of civil society to give itself political existence, or to make
political existence its actual existence. The drive of civil society to transform itself into political society,
or to make political society into the actual society, shows itself as the drive for the most fully possible
universal participation in legislative power.
Here, quantity is not without importance. If the augmentation of the Estates is a physical and intellectual
augmentation of one of the hostile forces - and we have seen that the various elements of the legislature
oppose one another as hostile forces - then the question of whether all as individuals are members of the
legislature or whether they should enter the legislature through deputies is the placing in question of the
representative principle within the representative principle, i.e., within that fundamental conception of
the political state which exists in constitutional monarchy. (1) The notion that the legislature is the
totality of the political state is a notion of the abstraction of the political state. Because this one act is the
sole political act of civil society, all should participate and want to participate in it at once. (2) All as
individuals. In the Estates, legislative activity is not regarded as social, as a function of society, but rather
as the act wherein the individuals first assume an actually and consciously social function, that is, a
political function. Here the legislature is no derivative, no function of society, but simply its formation.
This formation into a legislative power requires that all members of civil society regard themselves as
individuals, that they actually face one another as individuals. The abstraction of 'being a member of the
state' is their 'abstract definition', a definition that is not actualised in the actuality of their life.
There are two possibilities here: either the separation of the political state and civil society actually
obtains, or civil society is actual political society. In the first case, it is impossible that all as individuals
participate in the legislature, for the political state is an existent which is separated from civil society. On
the one hand, civil society would abandon itself as such if all [its members] were legislators; on the other
hand, the political state which stands over against it can tolerate it only if it has a form suitable to the
standards of the state. In other words, the participation of civil society in the political state through
deputies is precisely the expression of their separation and merely dualistic unity.
Given the second case, i.e., that civil society is actual political society, it is nonsense to make a claim
which has resulted precisely from a notion of the political state as an existent separated from civil
society, from the theological notion of the political state. In this situation, legislative power altogether
loses the meaning of representative power. Here, the legislature is a representation in the same sense in
which every function is representative. For example, the shoemaker is my representative in so far as he
fulfils a social need, just as every definite social activity, because it is a species-activity, represents only
the species; that is to say, it represents a determination of my own essence the way every man is the
representative of the other. Here, he is representative not by virtue of something other than himself which
he represents, but by virtue of what he is and does.
Legislative power is sought not for the sake of its content, but for the sake of its formal political
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch06.htm (6 of 13) [23/08/2000 18:49:41]
significance. For example, executive power, in and for itself, has to be the object of popular desire much
more than legislative power, which is the metaphysical political function. The legislative function is the
will, not in its practical but in its theoretical energy. Here, the will should not pre-empt the law; rather,
the actual law is to be discovered and formulated.
Out of this divided nature of the legislature - i.e., its nature as actual lawgiving function and at the same
time representative, abstract-political function - stems a peculiarity which is especially prevalent in
France, the land of political culture.
(We always find two things in the executive: the actual deed and the state's reason for this deed, as
another actual consciousness, which in its total organisation is the bureaucracy.)
The actual content of legislative power (so long as the prevailing special interests do not come into
significant conflict with the objectum quaestionis) is treated very much à part, as a matter of secondary
importance.
A question attracts particular attention only when it becomes political, that is to say, either when it can be
tied to a ministerial question, and thus becomes a question of the power of the legislature over the
executive, or when it is a matter of rights in general, which are connected with the political formalism.
How come this phenomenon? Because the legislature is at the same time the representation of civil
society's political existence; because in general the political nature of a question consists in its
relationship to the various powers of the political state; and finally, because the legislature represents
political consciousness, which can manifest itself as political only in conflict with the executive. There is
the essential demand that every social need, law, etc., be investigated and identified politically, that is to
say, determined by the whole of the state in its social sense. But in the abstract political state this
essential demand takes a new turn; specifically, it is given a formal change of expression in the direction
of another power (content) besides its actual content. This is no abstraction of the French, but rather the
inevitable consequence of the actual state's existing merely as the political state formalism examined
above. The opposition within the representative power is the kat exohin political existence of the
representative power. Within this representative constitution, however, the question under investigation
takes a form other than that in which Hegel considered it. It is not a question of whether civil society
should exercise legislative power through deputies or through all as individuals. Rather, it is a question of
the extension and greatest possible universalisation of voting, of active as well as passive suffrage. This
is the real point of dispute in the matter of political reform, in France as well as in England.
Voting is not considered philosophically, that is, not in terms of its proper nature, if it is considered in
relation to the crown or the executive. The vote is the actual relation of actual civil society to the civil
society of the legislature, to the representative element. in other words, the vote is the immediate, the
direct, the existing and not simply imagined relation of civil society to the political state. It therefore goes
without saying that the vote is the chief political interest of actual civil society. In unrestricted suffrage,
both active and passive, civil society has actually raised itself for the first time to an abstraction of itself,
to political existence as its true universal and essential existence. But the full achievement of this
abstraction is at once also the transcendence [Aufhebung] of the abstraction. In actually establishing its
political existence as its true existence civil society has simultaneously established its civil existence, in
distinction from its political existence, as inessential. And with the one separated, the other, its opposite,
falls. Within the abstract political state the reform of voting advances the dissolution [Auflösung] of this
political state, but also the dissolution of civil society.
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch06.htm (7 of 13) [23/08/2000 18:49:41]
We will encounter the question of the reform of voting later under another aspect, namely, from the point
of view of the interests. We will also discuss later the other conflicts which arise from the two-fold
character of the legislature (being at one time the political representative or mandatory of civil society, at
another time rather primarily the political existence of civil society and a specific existent within the
political formalism of the state).
In the meantime we return to the Remark to § 308.
The rational consideration of a topic, the consciousness of the Idea, is concrete and to that extent
coincides with a genuine practical sense. The concrete state is the whole, articulated into its particular
groups. The member of a state is a member of such a group, i.e., of a social class, and it is only as
characterised in this objective way that he comes under consideration when we are dealing with the state.
We have already said all that is required concerning this.
His (the member of a state's), mere character as universal implies that he is at one and the same time both
a private person and also a thinking consciousness, a will which wills the universal. This consciousness
and will, however, lose their emptiness and acquire a content and a living actuality only when they are
filled with particularity, and particularity means determinacy as particular and a particular class status;
or, to put the matter otherwise, abstract individuality is a generic essence, but has its immanent universal
actuality as the generic essence next higher in the scale.
Everything Hegel says is correct, with the restriction
1. that he assumes particular class status and determinacy as particular to be identical,
2. that this determinacy, the species, the generic essence next higher in the scale must also actually, not
only implicitly but explicitly, be established as the species or specification of the universal generic
essence.
But in the state, which he demonstrates to be the self-conscious existence of the moral spirit, Hegel
tacitly accepts this moral spirit's being the determining thing only implicitly, that is, in accordance with
the universal Idea. He does not allow society to become the actually determining thing, because for that
an actual subject is required, and he has only an abstract, imaginary subject.
§ 309. Since deputies are elected to deliberate and decide on public affairs, the point about their election
is that it is a choice of individuals on the strength of confidence felt in them, i.e., a choice of such
individuals as have a better understanding of these affairs than their electors have and such also as
essentially vindicate the universal interest, not the particular interest of a society or a Corporation in
preference to that interest. Hence their relation to their electors is ,,or that of agents with a commission or
specific instructions. A further bar to their being so is the fact that their assembly is meant to be a living
body in which all members deliberate in common and reciprocally instruct and convince each other.
1. The deputies are supposed to be something other than agents with a commission or specific
instructions, for they are supposed to be such as essentially vindicate the universal interest, not the
particular interest of a society or a Corporation in preference to that interest. Hegel has constructed the
representatives primarily as representatives of the Corporations etc., in order subsequently to reintroduce
the other political determination, namely, that they are not to vindicate the particular interest of the
Corporation etc. With that he abolishes his own determination, for he completely separates [the
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch06.htm (8 of 13) [23/08/2000 18:49:41]
representatives], in their essential character as representatives, from their Corporation-existence. In so
doing he also separates the Corporation from itself in its actual content, for it is supposed to vote not
from its own point of view but from the state's point of view; that is to say, it is supposed to vote in its
non-existence as Corporation. Hegel thus acknowledges the material actuality of the thing he formally
converts into its opposite, namely, the abstraction of civil society from itself in its political act; and its
political existence is nothing but this abstraction. Hegel gives as reason that the representatives are
elected precisely to the activity of public affairs; but the Corporations are not instances of public affairs.
2. The point about their election is supposed to be that it is a choice of individuals on the strength of
confidence felt in them, i.e., a choice of such individuals as have a better understanding of these affairs
than their electors have; from which, once again, it is supposed to follow that the relationship which the
deputies have to their electors is not that of agents.
Only by means of a sophism can Hegel declare that these individuals understand these affairs 'better' and
not 'simply'., This conclusion [namely, that they understand these affairs better] could be drawn only if
the electors had the option of deliberating and deciding themselves about public affairs or of delegating
definite individuals to discharge these things, i.e., precisely if deputation, or representation, did not
belong essentially to the character of civil society's legislature. But in the state constructed by Hegel,
deputation, or representation, constitutes precisely the legislature's specific essence, precisely as realised.
This example is characteristic [of the way] Hegel proposes the thing half intentionally, and imputes to it
in its narrow form the sense opposed to this narrowness.
Hegel gives the proper reason last. The deputies of civil society constitute themselves into an assembly,
and only this assembly is the actual political existence and will of civil society. The separation of the
political state from civil society appears as the separation of the deputies from their mandators. From
itself, society delegates to its political existence only the elements.
The contradiction appears two-fold:
1. Formal. The delegates of civil society are a society whose members are connected by the form of
instruction or commission with those who commission them. They are formally commissioned, but once
they are actual they are no longer commissioned. They are supposed to be delegates, and they are not.
2. Material. [This is] in regard to the interests. We will come back to this point later. Here, we find the
opposite of the formal contradiction. The delegates are commissioned to be representatives of public
affairs, but they really represent particular affairs.
What is significant is that Hegel here designates trust as the substance of election, as the substantial
relation between electors and deputies. Trust is a personal relationship. Concerning this, it says further in
the Addition to § 309:
Representation is grounded on trust, but trusting another is something different from giving my vote
myself in my own personal capacity. Hence majority voting runs counter to the principle that I should be
personally present in anything which is to be obligatory on me. We have confidence in a man when we
take him to be a man of discretion who will manage our affairs conscientiously and to the best of his
knowledge, just as if they were his own.
§310. The guarantee that deputies will have the qualifications and disposition that accord with this end -
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch06.htm (9 of 13) [23/08/2000 18:49:41]
since independent means attains its right in the first section of the Estates - is to be found so far as the
second section is concerned - the section drawn from the fluctuating and changeable element in civil
society - above all in the knowledge of the organisation and interests of the state and civil society, the
temperament, and the skill which a deputy acquires as a result of the actual transaction of business in
managerial or official positions, and then evinces in his actions. As a result, he also acquires and
develops a managerial and political sense, tested by his experience, and this is a further guarantee of his
suitability as a deputy.
First, the Upper Chamber, that of independent private property, was constructed for the sake of the
Crown and the executive as a guarantee against the disposition of the Lower Chamber as the political
existence of empirical universality; and now Hegel further requires a new guarantee which is supposed to
guarantee the disposition of the Lower Chamber itself.
First, trust, the guarantee of the elector, was the guarantee of the deputy. Now this trust itself further
requires the guarantee of the deputy's ability.
Hegel would rather have liked to make the Lower Chamber one of pensioned civil servants. He requires
of the deputy not only political sense but also managerial, bureaucratic sense.
What he really wants here is that the legislature be the real governing power. He expresses this such that
he twice requires the bureaucracy, once as representation of the Crown, at another time as representative
of the people.
Even if officials are allowed to be deputies in constitutional states, this is only because there is on the
whole an abstraction from class, from the civil quality, and the abstraction of state citizenship
predominates.
With this Hegel forgets that he allowed representation to proceed from the Corporations, and that the
executive directly opposes these. In this forgetfulness, which persists likewise in the following
paragraph, he goes so far that he creates an essential distinction between the deputies of the Corporations
and those of the classes.
In the Remark to this paragraph it says:
Subjective opinion, naturally enough, finds superfluous and even perhaps offensive the demand for such
guarantees, if the demand is made with reference to what is called the 'people'. The state, however, is
characterised by objectivity, not by a subjective opinion and its self-confidence. Hence it can recognise
in individuals only their objectively recognisable and tested character, and it must be all the more careful
on this point in connection with the second section of the Estates, since this section is rooted in interests
and activities directed towards the particular, i.e., ill the sphere where chance, mutability, and caprice
enjoy their right of free play.
Here, Hegel's thoughtless inconsistency and managerial sense become really disgusting. At the close of
the Addition to the preceding paragraph [i.e., § 309] it says:
The electors require a guarantee that their deputy will further and secure this general interest (the task of
the deputies described earlier).
This guarantee for the electors has underhandedly evolved into a guarantee against the electors, against
their self-confidence. in the Estates, empirical universality was supposed to come to the moment of
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch06.htm (10 of 13) [23/08/2000 18:49:41]
subjective formal freedom. Public consciousness was supposed to come to existence in that moment as
the empirical universality of the opinions and thoughts of the Many. (§ 301.)
Now these opinions and thoughts must give proof beforehand to the executive that they are its opinions
and thoughts. Unfortunately, Hegel here speaks of the state as a finished existence, although he is
precisely now in the process of finishing the construction of the state within the Estates. He speaks of the
state as a concrete subject which does not take offence at subjective opinion and its self-confidence, and
for which the individuals have first made themselves recognisable and tested. The only thing he still
lacks is a requirement that the Estates take an examination in the presence of the honourable executive.
Here, Hegel goes almost to the point of servility. It is evident that he is thoroughly infected with the
miserable arrogance of the world of Prussian officialdom which, distinguished in its bureaucratic
narrow-mindedness, looks down on the self-confidence of the subjective opinion of the people regarding
itself. Here, the state is at all times for Hegel identical with the Executive.
To be sure, in a real state mere trust or subjective opinion cannot suffice. But in the state which Hegel
constructs the political sentiment of civil society is mere opinion precisely because its political existence
is an abstraction from its actual existence, precisely because the state as a whole is not the objectification
of the political sentiment. Had Hegel wished to be consistent, he would have bad to work much harder to
construct the Estates in conformity with their essential definition (§ 3oi) as the explicit existence of
public affairs in the thought etc. of the Many, and thus nothing less than fully independent of the other
presuppositions of the political state.
Just as Hegel earlier called the presupposing of bad will in the executive etc. the view of the rabble, so
just as much and even more is it the view of the rabble to presuppose bad will in the people. Hegel has no
right to find it either superfluous or offensive when, among [the doctrines of] the theorists he scorns,
guarantees are demanded in reference to what is called the state, the soi-disant state, the executive, when
guarantees are demanded that the sentiment of the bureaucracy be the sentiment of the state.
§ 311. A further point about the election of deputies is that, since civil society is the electorate, the
deputies should themselves be conversant with and participate in its special needs, difficulties, and
particular interests. Owing to the nature of civil society, its deputies are the deputies of the various
Corporations (see § 308), and this simple mode of appointment obviates any confusion due to conceiving
the electorate abstractly and as an agglomeration of atoms. Hence the deputies eo ipso adopt the point of
view of society, and their actual election is therefore either something wholly superfluous or else reduced
to a trivial play of opinion and caprice.
First of all, Hegel joins the election in its determination as legislature (§§ 309, 310) to the fact that civil
society is the electorate, i. e., he joins the legislature to its representative character, through a simple
'further'. And just as thoughtlessly he expresses the enormous contradictions which lie in this 'further'.
• According to § 309 the deputies should essentially vindicate the universal interest, not the particular
interest of a society or a Corporation in preference to that interest.
• According to § 311 the deputies proceed from the Corporations, represent these particular interests and
needs, and avoid confusion due to abstract conceptions - as if the universal interest were not also such an
abstraction, an abstraction precisely from their Corporation, etc., interests.
• According to § 310 it is required that, as a result of the actual transaction of business etc., they have
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch06.htm (11 of 13) [23/08/2000 18:49:41]
acquired and evinced a managerial and political sense. In §311 a Corporation and civil sense is required.
• In the Addition to § 309 it says, representation is grounded on trust. According to § 311 the actual
election, this realisation of trust, its manifestation and appearance, is either something wholly superfluous
or else reduced to a trivial play of opinion and caprice.
That on which representation is grounded, its essence, is thus either something wholly superfluous, etc.
for representation. Thus in one breath Hegel establishes the absolute contradictions: Representation is
grounded on trust, on the confidence of man in man, and it is not grounded on trust. This is simply a
playing around with formalities.
The object of the representation is not the particular interest, but rather man and his state citizenship, i.e.,
the universal interest. On the other hand, the particular interest is the matter of the representation, and the
spirit of this interest is the spirit of the representative.
In the Remark to this paragraph, which we examine now, these contradictions are still more glaringly
carried through. At one time representation is representation of the man, at another time of the particular
interest of particular matter.
It is obviously of advantage that the deputies should include representatives of each particular main
branch of society (e.g. trade, manufactures, &c., &c.) - representatives who are thoroughly conversant
with it and who themselves belong to it. The idea of free unrestricted election leaves this important
consideration entirely at the mercy of chance. All such branches of society, however, have equal rights of
representation. Deputies are sometimes regarded as 'representatives'; but they are representatives in an
organic, rational sense only if they are representatives not of individuals or a conglomeration of them, but
of one of the essential spheres of society and its large-scale interests. Hence representation cannot now
be taken to mean simply the substitution of one man for another; the point is rather that the interest itself
is actually present in its representative, while he himself is there to represent the objective element of his
own being.
As for popular suffrage, it may be further remarked that especially in large states it leads inevitably to
electoral indifference, since the casting of a single vote is of no significance where there is a multitude of
electors. Even if a voting qualification is highly valued and esteemed by those who are entitled to it, they
still do not enter the poring booth. Thus the result of an institution of this kind is more likely to be the
opposite of what was intended; election actually falls into the power of a few, of a caucus, and so of the
particular and contingent interest which is precisely what was to have been neutralised.
Both §§ 312 and 313 are taken care of by our earlier comments, and are worth no special discussion. So
we simply put them down as is:
§ 312. Each class in the Estates (see §§ 305-8) contributes something peculiarly its own to the work of
deliberation. Further, one moment in the class-element has in the sphere of politics the special function of
mediation, mediation between two existing things. Hence this moment must likewise acquire a separate
existence of its own. For this reason the assembly of the Estates is divided into two houses.
O jerum!
§ 313. This division, by providing chambers of the first and second instance, is a surer guarantee for
ripeness of decision and it obviates the accidental character which a snap-division has and which a
Notes for a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, by Karl Marx
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch06.htm (12 of 13) [23/08/2000 18:49:41]
numerical majority may acquire. But the principal advantage of this arrangement is that there is less
chance of the Estates being in direct opposition to the executive; or that, if the mediating element is at the
same time on the side of the lower house, the weight of the lower house's opinion is all the stronger,
because it appears less partisan and its opposition appears neutralised.
The manuscript ends. At the top of the following page, Marx wrote:
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch06.htm (13 of 13) [23/08/2000 18:49:41]
